1	Latest corporate unbundler reveals laid-back approach : Roland Franklin , who is leading a 697m pound break-up bid for DRG , talks to Frank Kane
2	By FRANK KANE
3	IT SEEMS that Roland Franklin , the latest unbundler to appear in the UK , has made a fatal error in the preparation of his £697m break-up bid for stationery and packaging group DRG .
4	He has not properly investigated the target 's dining facilities .
5	The 63-year-old head of Pembridge Investments , through which the bid is being mounted says , ‘ rule number one in this business is : the more luxurious the luncheon rooms at headquarters , the more inefficient the business ’ .
6	If he had taken his own rule seriously , he would have found out that DRG has a very modest self-service canteen at its Bristol head office .
7	There are other things he has , on his own admission , not fully investigated , like the value of the DRG properties , or which part of the DRG business he would keep after the break up .
8	When the bid was launched last week , Mr Franklin faced some criticism from City commentators on both those counts .
9	He regards the charges as unfounded .
10	On property , he is blunt .
11	‘ I do not regard property profits as earnings .
12	We have made a bid of nearly £700m for a company with a book value of £200m — we 've acknowledged there is some extra worth there , but I can not see the sort of value they are talking about in property .
13	If they can prove it is there , we might pay for it , ’
14	On the other criticism he is equally dismissive .
15	‘ That point about the core business is very unfair , ’ he says .
16	It is difficult to decide when you are an outsider what the business is like .
17	We would eventually like to do it along with the management , within the philosophy we will impose . ’
18	The Franklin philosophy was learnt in the US leveraged buyout business at the side of Sir James Goldsmith .
19	Mr Franklin went there at the end of the 1970s , after the collapse of Keyser Ullman , the merchant bank where he was a director that was rescued by the Bank of England .
20	He feels that Keyser 's problems were hastened by an unwise acquisition .
21	He went to the US because ‘ Goldsmith decided that if you wanted to be a capitalist the UK and France were not the places to be ’ .
22	Along with Sir James he found the US much more attractive , taking over and breaking up some fairly hefty US corporations .
23	He rejects charges that he was partly responsible for the ‘ casino atmosphere ’ that gripped US corporate life in the early 1980s .
24	‘ We stirred it up , yes , but we never lost any money for anybody and we never added to the unemployment figures . ’
25	What he has learned from Goldsmith ( ‘ the only genius I have ever come across ’ ) is that the holding company is not the most important unit of corporate organisation .
26	‘ The concept of the company does not interest me - it 's the businesses that are important .
27	It does not matter whether or not DRG makes sellotape or Basildon Bond — it 's of no consequence to anybody if somebody else makes them . ’
28	And there is always the ultimate unbundler 's defence — that he will make money for his backers .
29	In a takeover campaign that has already seen vitriolic language , he responds to the charge that he is mounting the bid to enrich himself and his friends by saying : ‘ Nobody could take that as a criticism — this is an investor group .
30	It would be a criticism if I was doing it to impoverish myself ’ .
31	Square Mile : Stock Exchange takes the bull by the horns
32	By JOHN MOORE
33	SLOW developer ; confusing thinker who is liable to cause controversy and conflict .
34	These are the characteristics of the International Stock Exchange 's own Taurus programme rather than one of the signs of the zodiac .
35	For years the International Stock Exchange has been attempting to reduce the flow of paper on share transactions through the evolution of a computerised system known as Taurus .
36	With its enthusiasm for acronyms , the exchange has taken the ‘ Taurus ’ title for its computerised settlement masterplan from the full title of the scheme , the ponderously named Transfer and Automated Registration of Uncertificated Stock system .
37	Such a scheme will allow firms operating on the exchange to hold and transfer shares without the need for share certificates .
38	Proposals for the development of a Taurus system have been under consideration for much of this decade .
39	But , even at this stage , there are many hurdles to overcome , as a conference of City experts highlighted last week .
40	At the core of the problems in the development of the Taurus system is the rapidly changing character of financial markets and their structure .
41	When original objectives were set out in the early 1980s for improving services and reducing costs at the exchange through cutting down on the amount of paperwork , more detailed efforts were made to put the objectives into action .
42	These were overtaken by the Government 's plans to deregulate the British securities market , announced in 1983 , which were to lead to Big Bang .
43	There were then more pressing priorities .
44	But since 1987 there has been added impetus to the development of the Taurus programme , triggered largely by the post-Big Bang boom in share dealing and the subsequent crash in 1987 .
45	Huge backlogs of work built up in the securities dealers ' back offices as deals could not be completed within the exchange 's usual accounts periods .
46	According to Anthony Preece , director of operations at investment group Citicorp Scrimgeour Vickers , speaking at last week 's conference , there were at least 13 different design concepts for the future Taurus system under discussion in the City as of March this year .
47	Aside from the technological requirements of the new system , other important issues have to be resolved .
48	The participants in Taurus , the requirements needed for the participants , and the international consequences of the new system , are receiving detailed consideration .
49	Potential members of Taurus include the listed companies affected by the scheme , registrars , private client brokers , retail brokers , custodian banks , institutional investors , and money brokers .
50	Yet as Andrew Palmer , deputy finance director at Legal &amp; General Investments warned at the same conference , ‘ like all chains , Taurus is only going to be as strong as its weakest link .
51	And technology could easily become the weak link with some participants ’ .
52	He said that in the last two years he had met very few institutions which had not cut back their system budgets following the 1987 crash in share prices in the stock market .
53	‘ It would be a serious mistake for them to believe that they could put the whole Taurus market place at jeopardy by cutting back on their Taurus budget . ’
54	On the international front Bill Widdis , director of systems development at the stock exchange , is wary of arguments calling for full transnational integration of share clearing systems .
55	‘ We must note that the nations of Europe have evolved their national clearing and depository systems over many years and , for many reasons , they are all different from one another , ’ he says .
56	‘ Some systems serve markets in only one member state , while others , specialising in cerain types of instruments , are of European importance , ’ he stresses .
57	‘ Any developments towards integration should take this diversity into account and not seek to prescribe a uniform model when national differences do not compromise the objective of efficient and secure international settlement . ’
58	BIIBA-Fimbra battle worsens
59	THE gentlemanly war between the British Insurance and Investment Brokers Association ( BIIBA ) and the Financial Intermediaries , Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association ( Fimbra ) appears to be escalating .
60	BIIBA has now made a strong complaint to Fimbra about the latter 's decision to withdraw from an agreement made on 18 September which would have allowed BIIBA members , who held existing professional indemnity cover , to renew their existing policies .
61	Fimbra , as the regulatory body of middlemen who sell investment and insurance products , is attempting to require that these intermediaries hold professional indemnity insurance cover through a centralised scheme provided by Fimbra .
62	The insurance cover is designed to protect intermediaries against suits for damages brought by irate customers .
63	BIIBA , as the trade association attempting to represent most middlemen , is equally unhappy that Fimbra is attempting to bring in a centralised insurance scheme , as most of BIIBA 's members have their own professional indemnity insurance cover .
64	A centralised scheme would disrupt existing relationships between BIIBA members and their insurers , and lose them valuable financial advantages such as a no claims bonus .
65	BIIBA wanted a stay of execution on Fimbra 's plans and thought that it had gained such a deal when its chairman , David Palmer , met Fimbra chairman Lord Elton .
66	In those discussions BIIBA claims that it was agreed that its members would be allowed to renew their existing policies up to 31 October 1990 .
67	A misunderstanding then seems to have occurred with Fimbra writing to its members last week saying that its scheme had not been altered in any way and that members could not renew existing policies if the renewal date was after 1990 .
68	BIIBA 's director of public affairs commented : ‘ Fimbra have clearly reneged on their agreement .
69	In view of the rumours of meetings between it and the underwriters of the Fimbra scheme it appears that the insurers are calling the shots .
70	For a scheme which was claimed to take independent financial advisers out of the power of insurers , this is an ironic situation for Fimbra to have got itself into . ’
71	The campaign continues .
72	A new aroma THE International Stock Exchange started out life as a London coffee shop .
73	Last week it admitted its 400th member , the Swedish-owned United Securities Fondkommission , the first time that level has been reached in its 300-year history .
74	Perhaps the ISE ought to bring out a commemorative and suitably international blend .
75	View from Manhattan : Airlines fly into regulatory storm
76	By LARRY BLACK
77	RE-REGULATION is the buzzword on the lips of the US airline industry , as the worst excesses of the oligopoly bred by its predecessor , deregulation , once again became evident .
78	While the stock of yet another carrier soared on buyout speculation , a fatal crash at New York 's La Guardia Airport , again brought lax airline safety to public attention .
79	And another bankruptcy , involving Braniff Airlines , reminded everyone of the stranglehold the Big Eight carriers have over the domestic market .
80	But it was neither safety , monopoly nor dangerous debt loads that precipitated the first major intervention in the industry by Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner last week .
81	It was ‘ national security concerns ’ .
82	On Friday , citing worries about foreign influence over civil aviation , Mr Skinner issued a ‘ consent order ’ on NorthWest Airlines , forcing it to reduce the involvement of KLM , the Dutch carrier , in its recent buyout .
83	Earlier his office issued a request for information to United Airlines , whose $6.8bn staff buyout is to be part-financed by $750m from British Airways .
84	Foreign involvement in US carriers , Mr Skinner argued recently , could compromise response to a national emergency .
85	‘ Civil aviation must have a clear commitment to America , ’ he said .
86	KLM 's part in the NorthWest deal falls short of the 25 per cent limit placed on foreign ownership by the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 .
87	But the Dutch airline has had to agree to reduce its $400m investment in NorthWest to about $175m , or about a quarter of the equity involved in the takeover being led by Los Angeles businessman Al Checchi .
88	The $3.65bn buyout will increase the airline 's debt-equity ratio from less than 50 per cent to 585 per cent and NorthWest operates one of the oldest fleets in the industry , but Mr Skinner 's chief concern was the citizenship of KLM 's representative on the NorthWest board .
89	‘ I ca n't figure out why foreign investment is the battlefield he decided to pick , ’ one official said on Friday .
90	Washington 's stance seems sure to complicate the United Airlines buyout , which was to close a few days after the 10 October deadline set by Mr Skinner for information on BA 's involvement .
91	Though BA would have only 15 per cent of the voting shares in United , the second-largest US airline , its investment represents almost 80 per cent of the equity in the deal .
92	Under the apparent terms of the Transportation Secretary 's new regulations , BA would have to slash its contribution by $500m — probably killing the staff buyout — and would effectively lose its representation on the UA board .
93	Changing the ground rules has angered investors on both sides of the Atlantic , and Mr Skinner 's mandate for this is being widely questioned - particularly as foreign carriers are already represented on US airline boards .
94	British Department of Transport officials have expressed concern about the probable restrictions and urged ‘ an open and free investment climate ’ .
95	The irony of Mr Skinner 's re-regulation of the airline industry , say Wall Street analysts , is that it comes after the shake-out among domestic carriers has taken place and serves only to reinforce the advantages enjoyed by the surviving majors .
96	Mr Skinner 's real concern is not United 's loyalties in the event of an Anglo-American war but the bargaining strength of the US industry in international negotiations .
97	Bilateral treaties now regulate trans-Atlantic air traffic , and 1992 has US carriers worried about their strength in future talks .
98	US airlines not involved in partnerships complain Europe does not allow reciprocal investments in flag carriers , and argue that protectionism will worsen with continental integration .
99	US airlines already find themselves at a disadvantage because of ‘ open sky ’ policies during Reagan-era deregulation , they say .
100	Mr Skinner in speeches decrying ‘ unparalleled levels of foreign investment ’ , has made references to ‘ the covenants that spell out the opportunities ’ for the airlines of each nation .
101	Foreign influence over major US airlines would mean ‘ this framework would be radically altered , ’ he said .
102	What could rescue the United Airlines deal is the nature of the buyout ; United employees will control 75 per cent of the airline 's voting stock , making it by far the largest employee-owned corporation in the US .
103	A strong political lobby has already been mounted in Washington , arguing United ‘ will remain a truly American asset ’ because of the staff participation .
104	Democrat Robert Byrd , the former Senate leader , has criticised Mr Skinner 's actions in the NorthWest deal , and warned against interfering in United .
105	United is also arguing that employee concessions in the deal should be considered ‘ sweat equity ’ , reducing BA 's contribution to 35 per cent .
106	If BA can resell $300m of its United investment — ideally to US citizens - then its remaining equity share could be said to be only 21 per cent , airline officials in New York argue .
107	Mr Skinner 's action also raises the possibility of retaliation by other governments , and of slower international liberalisation if not an outright global re-regulatory war .
108	‘ The US may find it fairly unfriendly when some of its carriers want to make deals in Europe , ’ said Jon Ash of Global Aviation , an airline consulting firm .
109	‘ It has major implications for all future transactions . ’
110	USM : Remedial action at Lincat has results
111	By JOHN SHEPHERD
112	THE SHARE price of Lincat Group , maker of commercial catering equipment , is getting a boost after being toppled from its perch of 175p this summer when news of continuing problems at three subsidiaries filtered through to the City .
113	Analysts downgraded four-year profit projections and exposed Lincat to the harsher side of stock market life , culminating in a fall in the share price to 127p .
114	Apart from its loss-makers Lan-Elec and Abbey Clocks , the cost-cutting programme at a large profit generator , Corsair , was running behind schedule .
115	Group profits before tax for the first six months of the year soared by 46 per cent but the final result to 30 June , announced last week , showed a less than sparkling advance of 26 per cent to £1.28m compared to earlier City predictions of £1.4m-plus .
116	The poor second half performance , however , masks the changes that have been made at Lincat , which is now placed to deliver more acceptable returns .
117	The ill-fitting Abbey Clocks and most of the assets of Lan-Elec have been sold , and Corsair 's problems have been rectified by a new face behind its managing director 's desk .
118	Attention has also been focused on expanding through acquisition , removing doubts about the board 's ability to mix lateral movements with logical progression .
119	July saw the purchase of Colbrook Equipment , a designer of food display units , for a maximum profits-related payment of £2.16m — less than seven times Colbrook 's pre-tax earnings of £329,000 in 1988 .
120	Lincat also announced last week its first overseas acquisition .
121	Douglas , the leading US maker of pan washers for the bakery trade , provides a profitable US base and the chance to undercut the market by setting up more cost effective production facilities based on Lincat 's UK operations .
122	The purchases , together with the remedial action , should ensure that Martin Craddock , chairman and chief executive , can at least match analysts ' forecasts of £1.8m pre-tax when he reports on the 1989-90 year .
123	Taking last Friday 's price of 160p , Lincat is on an undemanding p/e of 9.5 and less than eight the following year .
124	Guy Bell of Beeson Gregory , a new name dealing in USM shares , says the company is under rated and is set for medium-term expansion .
125	MB and Caradon stay quiet on bid rumours
126	By JERRY CONNOLLY
127	MB GROUP , the old Metal Box company , refused to confirm yesterday that it was on the verge of a £300m-plus bid for Caradon , the building products group .
128	Caradon also refused to comment , but has already announced that it was involved in talks which could lead to a bid .
129	Its share price closed on Friday at 474p , valuing the group at £282.2m .
130	A rise of 14p amid speculative interest added almost £10m to the value of the bathroom fittings and showers business on Friday .
131	Analysts expect the company to make £36m pre-tax profits for the year to March .
132	The price has risen by 119p since Caradon announced a possible bid on 31 August .
133	While MB is refusing to comment on what it called ‘ market rumours ’ , senior executives , including chief executive Murray Stuart were involved in meetings at MB 's head offices yesterday .
134	City sources believe MB is the most likely suitor for Caradon as it reshapes into an international trading company .
135	Last week it announced first-quarter contributions of £11.1m from CMB — the result of the £900m merger between Metal Box and the French Carnaud company .
136	MB has two core businesses along with its CMB shareholding — security printing and heating and bathroom products .
137	Last month it agreed to spend £194.2m on the US-based ABS cheque-printing business .
138	A pro-forma statement of the combined companies ' net assets was £294m .
139	MB 's building products division has a large overlap with Caradon 's operations .
140	Caradon was floated in July 1987 with a market value of £134m following a £61m management buyout from Reed in 1985 .
141	A slow down in the bathroom business — identified by MB when it announced its results last week — affected City confidence in Caradon .
142	But it has a range of highly-regarded brand names including Mira showers , Twyford bathroom fittings and Celuform plastic timber systems .
143	Last year Caradon bought the Everest double-glazing business from RTZ for £32m and was thought to be stalking further acquisitions .
144	MB last week admitted its Stelrad central heating and bathroom products business was operating in a reduced UK market for central heating and stagnating bathrooom products market .
145	European markets are more buoyant , and some analysts believe Caradon 's products could be sold more strongly in Europe .
146	B &amp; Q team buys Kent Garden Centres
147	By JERRY CONNOLLY
148	THE MANAGEMENT team which helped develop the B &amp; Q DIY business is on the acquisition trail again — this time in the gardening business with a ‘ multi-million pound ’ deal to buy Kent Garden Centres , writes Jerry Connolly .
149	The acquisition , announced yesterday , brings five centres and two development sites into the Retail Corporation , which plans a nationwide chain of 50 garden centres under its Gardenstore operation within two years .
150	Retail , which refuses to disclose the terms of the deal , was set up last year with £10m of City capital and is headed by Malcolm Parkinson , the former B &amp; Q managing director .
151	Mr Parkinson says Gardenstore , with 11 outlets on more than 66 acres , ‘ is one of the top four garden centre chains in turnover and number of sites , and largest in square footage terms ’ .
152	John Kennedy , former B &amp; Q financial and systems director , is also on the Retail board along with Alan Greensides , former buying and merchandising director at the DIY concern .
153	They believe the garden centre business is at the same stage of development as DIY was a decade ago .
154	A spokesman said : ‘ The industry is highly fragmented and business will be growing through acquisitions for some time .
155	Retail is unwilling to help the opposition by saying what it paid for Kent . ’
156	Europe 's mobile phones top the 2 million mark
157	By MARY FAGAN
158	EUROPE 'S cellular radio market broke the two million subscriber barrier in September , a rise of 26 per cent since the beginning of the year .
159	According to the Fintech Mobile Communications newsletter , the UK is still by far the largest market with almost 700,000 subscribers split between Racal Telecom 's Vodafone and British Telecom 's Cellnet .
160	But although the UK now has 12.28 cellular telephones per 1,000 inhabitants , Norway leads the penetration stakes with almost 40 handsets per 1,000 inhabitants .
161	Apart from the UK and Scandinavian countries , penetration is still low in Europe , but this is expected to change over the next few years as telecommunications markets are opened up .
162	West Germany , for example , is to introduce a digital cellular radio service in competition with that offered by the Deutsche Bundespost , and France has already licensed a private operator .
163	The real boost for cellular radio will come in two to three years ' time with the introduction of the Europe-wide service , GSM .
164	33m pounds buyout of FIG goes ahead
165	By MARY FAGAN
166	THE £33m management buyout by Fenchurch Insurance Group from GPG has been completed despite pressure for a better price from GPG shareholders including Robert Maxwell .
167	Mr Maxwell , with 15 per cent of GPG , the old Guiness Peat Group , and Lord Kissin , with a five per cent stake , strongly opposed plans to sell off three of GPG 's operating companies .
168	But shareholders voted by three to one last week to back the sell-offs which will reduce borrowings to a consortium of banks , who acquired 61 per cent of GPG after the collapse of the New Zealand Equiticorp business .
169	The mbo of Fenchurch was engineered by JO Hambro Magan , whose managing director Alton Irby said : ‘ It shows that leveraged buyouts can be done , even if this one was difficult .
170	‘ The problem was that an insurance broker is not asset-backed .
171	It has cash flow but its assets are its people .
172	The insurance business cycle is also at a low ebb .
173	Around a hundred of the staff have taken part in the buyout , which we are very pleased with .
174	It shows they have confidence in the management . ’
175	The mbo is being led by six senior executives .
176	The buyout involves an initial payment of £30m , with a further £3.2m of deferred payments including £2.7m for contingencies .
177	Equity in the mbo vehicle is being provided by FIG staff , with mezzanine finance arranged and under-written by Intermediate Capital Group .
178	Senior debt is underwritten by National Westminster Bank .
179	Economic Outlook : A deficit between consenting adults
180	By SARAH HOGG
181	The Chancellor is trying to convince his political audience that Britain 's deficit ( now running at close on 4 per cent of national income ) is not a problem ; and to convince the markets not to sell sterling .
182	In both arguments , the next two weeks — which include a probable German interest-rate rise and an unavoidable Conservative Party conference — will be critical .
183	If Mr Lawson can hold off a base rate rise at least until he can blame the Germans , that will make his political task a fraction easier ; but not much .
184	The balance of payments is a circular identity of inflows and outflows , which must necessarily match each other .
185	You can start the argument at any point on the circle .
186	Viewed from one angle , a current account deficit is merely the necessary counterpart of a capital account surplus , and it is from this point that Nigel Lawson 's defensive intellectual outworks run .
187	Britain 's kind of deficit arises not because the Government needs to borrow ; the public sector itself is in heavy surplus .
188	The deficit is created by the actions of the private sector .
189	If — so his argument goes — consenting adults in the private sectors of different countries lend money to each other , all that shows is that capital markets are usefully redirecting the surplus savings of one economy to the investment opportunities in another .
190	That detached observer , the International Monetary Fund , calls this kind of deficit ‘ efficient and self-correcting ’ .
191	History shows it can go on for a long time , as deficits and surpluses did during the golden age before the First World War .
192	Very recent history suggests the world has become much more like that again , with investment in each country breaking free from the constraint of domestic savings .
193	Evidence of excessive demand There is some observable good sense in this argument , and it helps to explain why sterling has not hit the fan a lot earlier , during a truly spectacular swing from surplus to deficit over the past two years .
194	But its limits are exposed by asking a simple question : why , then , should Mr Lawson not be quite happy to see the deficit get even larger ?
195	Why should a ‘ good ’ deficit not get even ‘ better ’ ?
196	The first reason the Chancellor gives is that there is some ‘ bad ’ froth on the ‘ good ’ deficit : that is to say , evidence of excessive domestic demand .
197	This argument starts from a different point on the balance of payments circle , with the excess of imports over exports .
198	Even here , something can be found to say for the deficit , as a safety valve for inflationary pressures .
199	But it still has , willy-nilly , to be financed by attracting capital inflows .
200	Now , this surge in demand was equally clearly created by the grown-up private sector , not by a government binge .
201	But here Mr Lawson does not seem to be quite so indifferent to the behaviour of consenting adults : he has been endeavouring to control their behaviour by altering the price at which they can borrow .
202	Answer number two turns on another price that bothers him .
203	International borrowing nowadays takes place in a world of moving exchange rates .
204	In pre-1914 days , there was a gold standard , and a single world capital market centred on London .
205	Today there is again a global capital market , but no gold standard , no fixed exchange rates , for Britain not even a European Monetary System .
206	That is not Mr Lawson 's fault , of course , but he has to live with the danger that while the world 's capital markets will duly bridge the gap between Britain 's domestic savings and investment , they will only do so at a lower price for sterling .
207	If you take the argument about consenting adults to its logical conclusion , that price — Britain 's exchange rate — should be left to them , too .
208	But however suspicious Mrs Thatcher may be of managed exchange rate systems , she dislikes a falling pound as much as anyone .
209	So we come back around the circle to the capital side of the balance of payments , and the operationally interesting question : for how long can we expect the world 's savers to make up our domestic shortage ?
210	Mr Lawson is right to say that deficits are more sustainable than they were in the 1970s .
211	There is indeed a world market for savings , although that is not a wholly comforting fact : the Chancellor himself foresees a world shortage of savings , which means everyone is going to have to compete harder ( ie , pay more ) for them .
212	Meanwhile , market operators take due account of exchange rate risk ; and what alarms them is not so much the size , but the direction of a deficit .
213	Over-optimism at the Treasury Through the summer , the signs of a slowdown in domestic demand had come reasonably on cue : the inflation figures duly peaked , retail sales tailed off , even labour costs did not accelerate as fast as feared .
214	Car sales were uncomfortably large , and with them the July trade deficit ; but the Treasury thought it detected more comforting underlying trends .
215	Last week it was obliged to admit , yet again , to over-optimism .
216	The Chancellor is now prepared to claim no more than that the deficit is ‘ more or less flattening out ’ .
217	Not much of a claim , more than a year after he started trying to turn the tide ; and one yet to be proven , anyway .
218	There are such awkward critics as Fred Bergsten , of the Institute of International Economics in Washington , who argue that a private-sector induced deficit might actually be more tiresome than the US-style ‘ twin deficits ’ — in public finances and the current account — because however much he deprecates the latter , at least it is clear what ought to be done .
219	It is , he argues , not at all clear how you raise private savings to close the other kind of gap .
220	This point should not be pushed to perversity : the IMF is still clear that a US-style deficit is worse , and it certainly is not being quickly corrected .
221	But Mr Lawson has to show he knows how to do the trick , before he can win his argument , in theory or in the markets .
222	Corporate Profile : French flair and Le Mortgage push Compagnie Bancaire ahead : Michael Prest takes a look at one of Europe 's most unusual and successful financial groups
223	By MICHAEL PREST
224	BRITISH yuppies yearning for that charming little place they saw in the Dordogne last summer have probably never heard of Compagnie Bancaire .
225	But since 1988 they may well have taken out ‘ Le Mortgage ’ offered by the French company 's British offshoot , UCB Group , to finance their terrain gastronomique .
226	In so doing , they will have added their mite to the expansion of one of Europe 's most unusual and successful financial groups .
227	Le Mortgage offers fixed-rate sterling finance to Britons wanting to buy second homes in France .
228	CB takes care of the notaire who is the dread of British buyers of French property .
229	It is a tiny part of CB 's business .
230	But in several ways it illustrates the group 's strengths : size combined with flair , a strong French base from which to develop business abroad , and a flexible structure .
231	CB is certainly successful .
232	Consolidated net operating income has risen from FFr880m ( £86.3m ) in 1984 to FFr1.34bn last year .
233	Over the same period new business almost doubled to FFr68.4bn , total loans and other financings grew from FFr94.3bn to FFr146bn , and savings managed jumped from FFr6.3bn to FFr29.9bn .
234	In 1988 the group had 8,000 employees , of whom 500 were outside France .
235	More important , perhaps , CB is an unusual organisation .
236	As a massive lender which takes no deposits , a marketer of industrial and consumer finance , and increasingly a purveyor of insurance-related products to an under-insured French public , CB probably embodies a unique combination of strategy and interests .
237	There is definitely no parallel in Britain .
238	CB originated in the ruins of France one year after the end of the Second World War as Union Financiere d'Enterprises Francaises et Etrangeres .
239	Its founder , Jacques de Fouchier , is still closely associated with the group as Chairman Emeritus — itself an unsual idea — of the supervisory board .
240	In the early years , the company was involved mainly in financing imports of raw materials and factory equipment , and its chief shareholders were the leading French banks .
241	Since then two related developments have given the group its unusual character .
242	One development was a network of stakes in the principal companies in each type of business .
243	Four of these companies are quoted separately from CB on the Paris Bourse ( CB received a London listing in 1973 ) : UCB ( 33 per cent owned by CB , in housing and property finance ) , UFB Locabail ( 66.2 per cent , business equipment finance ) , Cetelem ( 67.7 per cent , consumer finance ) , and Cardif ( 56 per cent , life insurance and savings products ) .
244	The man who runs the group is 51-year-old Andre Levy-Lang .
245	He is the engaging chairman of CB 's management board , whose education at the Ecole Polytechnique and doctorate from Stanford University create an aura of international competence one meets too rarely in British companies .
246	He explained that the structure evolved because the group needed equity to finance growth .
247	Several of the quoted subsidiaries and associates also control other businesses , for example Solveg , a property portfolio management company , in which several CB group companies have stakes .
248	This structure is typical of the continental , as distinct from the British , firm : the holding group , particularly the bank holding group , stems from equity involvement in industry , an involvement shunned by British banks .
249	At the same time , CB , as it became in 1959 , has seen the source of its earnings diversify as consumer finance became more and more important to the group .
250	Loans made in 1979 totalled FFr59.1m , of which property accounted for FFr40m and consumer finance accounted for FFr9.29m , or 15.7 per cent of the total .
251	By 1988 , however , the picture had changed dramatically .
252	Consumer finance contributed FFr40m , or a quarter , to all loans that year of FFr147m , while property made up FFr75.1m of the total .
253	The tell-tale sign was that at FFr29.5m , consumer finance was easily the biggest component in new lending last year .
254	In the early 1980s , new lending was roughly the same in consumer finance as in housing and property finance .
255	Another simultaneous change of long-term importance to CB is the growth of overseas business .
256	The total of loans and other financings to customers outside France has gone up from FFr28m in 1981 to FFr10.7m last year .
257	Mr Levy-Lang said that this year a quarter of new lending will have been outside France , and 90 per cent of that will have been in the United Kingdom .
258	CB already claims 2 per cent of the British fixed-rate mortgage market .
259	Mr Levy-Lang is casual about CB 's expansion .
260	The move into consumer finance , he said , was chiefly caused by restrictions on lending , the corset , to other areas .
261	‘ Regulation made us do that , ’ he said .
262	CB , he claimed , had in mind no particular balance between its components .
263	‘ We have no ratio in the mix of business .
264	We want to grow as fast as we can . ’
265	But there are disciplines .
266	The key objective is a 15 per cent return on equity , and all business within the group is conducted at arm 's length on guidelines laid down by CB at the centre .
267	Mr Levy-Lang said : ‘ It is a financial discipline in a way .
268	We ca n't do anything we want within the group . ’
269	There is also a shrewd understanding of what consumers want .
270	With a wry smile , Mr Levy-Lang observed : ‘ I have a great belief in the rationality of consumers .
271	They are very intelligent economists , all of them . ’
272	He acknowledges that as a result , the consumer finance and investment markets are very competitive , not least in France where savers now have more faith in money , as distinct from assets , and the big banks are muscling in .
273	One solution for CB , according to Mr Levy-Lang , is attention to detail .
274	‘ We approach every problem as a specific problem .
275	It is what makes us different from the commercial banks .
276	You have to offer specific services to specific people . ’
277	Despite its rate of return target , the average between 1984 and 1988 was 12.7 per cent , slipping to 12.4 per cent last year .
278	Several factors are inhibiting growth of earnings : a weaker domestic loan market , tighter interest rate margins , and slow growth by some subsidiaries .
279	The latter is within CB 's competence to remedy .
280	Cardif , the insurance company , and Cortal , the asset management division of CB , have both grown too slowly recently for the group 's taste .
281	CB is also trying to substitute floating rate for fixed rate mortgages in France .
282	These problems will take a while to sort out .
283	CB is also most unlikely to reach its ambitious goal of generating half its earnings outside France by 1992 , despite having started 20 new businesses in Europe over the last few years .
284	Mr Levy-Lang is characteristically disingenuous about the talismanic date of 1992 .
285	‘ It led us to speed it up , ’ he said , while denying that the alleged single market would of itself promote business .
286	Blessed with tight and impressive management , however , and its firm French base , CB 's long-term growth seems assured , whatever the specific problems .
287	And there will be no difficulty in following events .
288	The group 's financial yearbook , beautifully produced in English , is as comprehensive as the most demanding analyst could wish .
289	Perhaps after Le Mortgage the British will see ‘ Le Life Policy ’ and ‘ Le Loan ’ .
290	Business and City Summary
291	By MICHAEL PREST
292	TODAY : Revised UK retail figures for August .
293	Change in UK credit business .
294	US August construction spending .
295	Japanese foreign exchange reserves ( September ) .
296	West Germany current account ( August ) .
297	WEDNESDAY : UK housing starts and completions ( August ) .
298	UK overseas travel and tourism contribution to invisible earnings ( July ) .
299	THURSDAY : UK second quarter personal income and expenditure figures .
300	UK second quarter industry finance statistics .
301	Bundesbank council meeting ( West Germany ) FRIDAY : UK second quarter steel consumption and stock changes ( final ) .
302	US unemployment ( September ) .
303	US non-farm payrolls ( September ) .
304	Commodities : Reading higher prices in the tea leaves
305	By MICHAEL PREST
306	SINCE we are in the middle of the International Coffee Organisation meeting -how do they pass a week without a visible result ? — I thought it appropriate to think about tea .
307	It is not such a perverse idea , because a lot of people have recently become interested in that noble beverage .
308	As always , the interest is not unconnected with a little matter of price .
309	At last Monday 's weekly London tea auction , prices reached their highest for three years .
310	Many in the trade expect prices to go up further today , and possibly for quite a few auctions to come .
311	Richard Howell of Sheppards , the London stockbrokers , has been following tea and plantation shares for 20 years .
312	‘ My anticipation is that we will certainly see a rise on Monday — not of the same proportion , but there 's clearly going to be a rise .
313	What 's developed in 1989 is a genuine shortage of teas of all grades . ’
314	Over the past 12 months the price of lower medium quality tea , which is the main ingredient in the British cuppa and imparts that unique lorry-driver flavour , has almost doubled from 78p a kilogramme to 135p .
315	Medium qualities have also risen noticeably , from 98p to 145p , over the same period .
316	But quality teas , the best grade , have hardly changed at around 200p a kilogramme .
317	The rise is particularly interesting because it confounded expectations .
318	The Economist Intelligence Unit concluded in its World Commodity Outlook 1989 : ‘ Short of climatic intervention — to which tea is less vulnerable than most other major crops — a continuation of the downtrend seems unavoidable : we expect London auction prices to average £1/kg , or even less , in 1989 . ’
319	At the beginning of the year , however , the trend argument was much more plausible than it is today .
320	World production of tea ( black and green ) grew from 2.27m tonnes in 1985 to 2.34m tonnes in 1987 , and rose again in 1988 .
321	Whereas , according to the United States Department of Agriculture , world production rose by 4.5 per cent , consumption , on estimates by the International Monetary Fund , went up by only 2.6 per cent .
322	At the same time , the main import markets continued to decline .
323	In 1987 imports into Britain fell by 12 per cent , although with around a fifth of the market we remained easily the world 's biggest tea importers .
324	The Irish , however , drink an average of 3 cups a day , fractionally more than the British .
325	But beware of extrapolations , my daughter .
326	Expectations were upset for three basic reasons : First , the long Tamil insurgency in Sri Lanka has finally taken its toll of the tea estates .
327	Exports from that lovely island could be 40 per cent lower in 1989 than in 1988 .
328	Since Sri Lanka previously exported about 200,000 tonnes of tea annually , only a little less than India , the biggest exporter , the loss is crucial .
329	Second , there was a climatic disaster .
330	Malawi , which exports normally about 40,000 tonnes a year , has suffered from a serious drought .
331	Only a good crop in Kenya has saved Africa from another disaster .
332	Third , Indian exports have been depressed by a combination of politics and nature .
333	The political factor is the imminent general election .
334	Fearful of the consequences of higher tea prices , the government has sought to stabilise them by fiddling the weekly Calcutta auctions .
335	In alternate weeks the auction is wholly devoted to domestic buyers or to foreign buyers .
336	Since the bulk of the tea at the Calcutta auctions is low medium quality , the dual auction has a disproportionate impact on tea prices generally , and on London prices especially .
337	This effect has been compounded by the natural factor , a disappointing crop in southern India .
338	There are other elements in the price rise as well .
339	At the end of last year , again largely for political reasons , the Pakistan government granted licences to importers to bring in tea .
340	Pakistan is now a net tea importer .
341	In a different and much more alarming category is the fate of the Soviet industry .
342	The Soviet Union used to produce about 150,000 tonnes of tea a year , making it one of the biggest growers .
343	But nuclear power changed that .
344	According to Mr Howell , all the bushes in Georgia were polluted by radiation , and have been destroyed .
345	For the first time that anyone can remember , the Soviet Union has been buying at the London auction .
346	Mr Howell is convinced that the tea market under-supplied for several years .
347	‘ This genuine shortage is occurring for the first time ever .
348	This is the great genuine move in the tea price . ’
349	There is evidence to support the case that prices will remain high for a while .
350	Despite the withdrawal of the Indian army from Sri Lanka , peace may not be established .
351	Even if it is , some estates could take years to rehabilitate .
352	A tea bush requires constant attention : if not plucked for a year it can take two years to return to normal ; if bushes have to be uprooted , new ones take seven years to come into production .
353	Despite the relative growth of consumption and demand in the mid-1980s , the market for black tea alone was finely balanced at around 1.67m tonnes .
354	Moreover , the four biggest growers and exporters — India , Sri Lanka , China and Kenya — also have large populations and / or high birth rates .
355	As the Indian example shows , domestic consumption is a vital factor .
356	Yet one must be cautious .
357	Historically tea has been a fairly dull market , dominated by trade interests — two arguments against the London Fox 's efforts to excite interest in a tea futures contract .
358	A balanced market , by definition , can swing surprisingly fast in the opposite direction : the chances are , for example , that Malawi will not have a drought next year .
359	But for all I know , the ICO could still be meeting then .
360	International Capital Markets : Accountants face hard task in search for global harmony
361	By DAVID FRANK
362	YESTERDAY was the last day for comments from the public on a paper issued in January entitled : ‘ Comparability of Financial Statements ’ published by the International Accounting Standards Committee .
363	This is hardly the sort of catchy title guaranteed to get most of us rushing to our desks in search of pen and paper , nor is it easy to imagine squeezing into packed village halls to listen to speeches demanding a rewrite of the rules on deferred taxation .
364	In acknowledgement of this , IASC , which comprises the leading world accounting bodies , sent out a separate invitation to interested parties asking for their views on the subject .
365	It called this : ‘ Towards the International Harmonisation of Financial Statements ’ .
366	Harmonising international accounting standards is more important than one might think .
367	In today 's markets , where increasingly companies are looking to raise funds beyond their own national borders , agreement on an objective standard for measuring the financial health of a business is vital .
368	The world 's top securities market regulators , who met recently in Venice , cited the need to reconcile financial statements to local accounting standards as a significant factor in any company 's decision on which markets to target or not for an international offering of new shares .
369	The lack of accounting harmonisation , particularly between the US and the UK , is seen by many bankers as the key issue in the development of the Euro-equity market , where new issues of shares are offered in more than one country simultaneously .
370	Two examples highlight the problems .
371	When British Telecom was privatised , shares were issued both in the US and the UK ( and other jurisdictions ) .
372	BT 's registration statement for the US showed that ‘ net income ’ and ‘ shareholders ’ equity' under UK generally accepted accounting principles ( Gaap ) were each double the US Gaap figures and retained earnings were three times the US Gaap equivalent .
373	When BP made its disastrous privatisation offering at the time of the crash , its profit forecast for the year ending 31 December , 1987 , computed in accordance with UK Gaap , was £1.45bn whereas its forecast based on US Gaap was 25 per cent lower at £1.1bn .
374	Both forecasts were included in the US and Canadian prospectuses .
375	The UK prospectus , however , contained only the UK Gaap computed forecast .
376	The problem IASC , and the market regulators ' body Iosco , faces though is determining how harmonisation can be brought about .
377	Everyone might agree that financial statements should be based on the same standard but the inevitable follow up comment is : ‘ Yes , ours ’ .
378	According to bankers active in the Euro-equity market this cry is heard most frequently from US accountancy firms which believe their standards , being the most conservative , provide the safest blueprint .
379	Without the support of the Americans , harmonisation seems a distant ideal .
380	And yet applying US standards in this country for example , could require a massive downward restatement of corporate profits and net worth , which would be resisted fiercely .
381	What some experts would like to see is a system of reciprocity whereby companies could make international equity offerings using their home market accounting standards without the need to reconcile their financial statements to the standards of each jurisdiction in which shares are offered .
382	This probably provides the best way forward , not least because of the major markets only the US , Italy and Canada explicitly require foreign companies to restate their figures according to local standards .
383	The UK by contrast requires only that figures are prepared and audited to internationally acceptable standards but not necessarily UK Gaap .
384	If the US could be persuaded to take a similar line , many of the problems for companies contemplating an international issue would disappear .
385	The Eurobond market is on course for a record year after registering a volume of $165bn for the first nine months according to Euromoney Bondware .
386	At this rate 1989 volume should comfortably surpass 1986 's record figure of $179bn , and may yet reach the magic $200bn .
387	40% of shareholders approve Ferranti demerger plan
388	By MARY FAGAN , Technology Correspondent
389	MERCHANT bankers proposing a demerger of Ferranti International into two separate businesses have received the initial approval of 40 per cent of the company 's shareholders .
390	Hill Samuel said yesterday that the plan to put Ferranti 's naval and avionics businesses into a separate company and to merge it with another UK defence company , thought to be Thorn EMI , is to be investigated further .
391	Christopher Baker of Hill Samuel said the plan was presented in writing to the Ferranti board on Friday .
392	Sir Derek Alun-Jones , Ferranti 's chairman , announced on Friday that the beleaguered company would have to write off £185m .
393	Ferranti is now convinced that it was the victim of fraud perpetrated by International Signal and Control which it took over two years ago .
394	A report by Coopers &amp; Lybrand into suspect ISC contracts and the nature and extent of any fraud is expected to be delivered to Ferranti today or tomorrow .
395	Ferranti then hopes to decide on a course of action and in particular on how to restructure its capital base .
396	It has already undertaken to sell off £100m worth of businesses and to raise £150m through a rights issue or by attracting a suitor .
397	Sir Derek said last night that he had ‘ glanced ’ at the Hill Samuel plan and was interested to see how it works out .
398	But he stressed : ‘ It 's only an idea , not a proposal , and it needs a lot more work . ’
399	The Hill Samuel plan envisages splitting off the UK naval and avionics businesses and giving shareholders one share in the new company for every share they hold in the existing organisation .
400	Talks are believed to have been held with Thorn EMI , whose defence interests are up for sale .
401	A successful merger could create a defence company with estimated sales of £800m .
402	Ferranti 's naval and avionics businesses are thought to have a turnover of about £500m .
403	According to Mr Baker , Thorn 's ground-based radar activities would dovetail with Ferranti 's airborne radar and result in a formidable force in European defence electronics .
404	Ferranti 's annual meeting , adjourned until 10 October , will now almost inevitably be put back for a further four to six weeks in the light of recent events .
405	Meanwhile , the company hopes to go ahead later this month with the launch of its Creditphone mobile telephone service .
406	Ferranti is one of four licencees starting these low-cost services , intended to bring mobile communications to the masses .
407	The company also said that it will continue with its application to the Department of Trade and Industry to operate a ‘ personal communications network ’ , which is expected to present the same opportunities in the next decade as cellular mobile radio is doing in this .
408	Lawson 's battle for base rates
409	By PATRICK HOSKING , Banking Correspondent
410	NERVOUS investors and hard-pressed mortgage borrowers face another anxious week as Chancellor Nigel Lawson battles against continuing pressure to lift base lending rates .
411	Analysts expect the pound to come under renewed pressure in the run-up to Thursday 's Bundesbank meeting , which will decide whether and by how much to raise West Germany 's key Lombard interest rate .
412	The markets have already fully-discounted a half-point rise in the German rate to 7.5 per cent .
413	However , a full one-point rise would probably trigger another run on sterling and force a one-point base rate rise in the UK .
414	The Government has signalled its determination to resist raising the 14 per cent base rate during the politically-sensitive fortnight of the Labour and Conservative party conferences .
415	According to Bill Martin , economist at UBS-Phillips &amp; Drew : ‘ The only thing the Chancellor fears more than the currency speculators are the rows of blue rinses at Blackpool next week ’ .
416	Building societies would respond to a base rate increase with a hike in their mortgage rates .
417	A one-point rise in the mortgage rate to 14.5 per cent would increase the monthly payment of a £30,000 endowment mortgage-holder by £17.75 to £271.88 .
418	There are fears that share prices could tumble again , even after last week 's 70.8 point drop in the FTSE-100 index to 2,299.4 .
419	‘ The cosy notion of a soft landing has now evaporated in investors ’ minds , ’ Mr Martin said .
420	However , on Friday the Confederation of British Industry accused the financial markets of ‘ hysterical over-reaction ’ and said there was ‘ plenty of good news ’ on the real economy .
421	Final retail sales data for August , published today , will test the accuracy of the provisional 0.4 per cent growth rate .
422	Results this week from Next and Sears will also give a measure of the retail downturn following the 1,850 job cuts announced by Littlewoods last week .
423	Results from four TV companies this week may give clues as to any slowdown in corporate expenditure .
424	Pearl chief to meet Australian Mutual amid bid rumours
425	By JOHN MOORE , Assistant City Editor
426	DAVID ANDERSON , chairman of Australian Mutual Provident , Australia 's biggest life insurer , and Einion Holland , chairman of Pearl Group , the British life insurance company , are meeting over the next few days amid speculation that the Australian group is poised to mount a takeover bid for Pearl worth at least £1bn .
427	Australian Mutual Provident executives were yesterday believed to be mounting plans for a takeover which could be one of the largest acquisitions made in the British life insurer sector .
428	‘ Any bid which has not been discussed with us will have to be considered , ’ said Mr Holland , yesterday .
429	‘ I have a long standing arrangement to meet Mr Anderson this week .
430	But so far we have received no direct approach .
431	The last time I met AMP was over two years ago . ’
432	The news of the meeting of the two executives follows a steep rise in Pearl 's share price last Friday .
433	It rose 44p to 552p .
434	There has been intense interest in the British life insurance sector by Australian , New Zealand and Continental interests for some time .
435	Australian Mutual Provident has been building up its stake in Pearl for the last two years .
436	In June this year AMP 's shareholding jumped to 18 per cent when it acquired a block of over 23 million shares , representing 13 per cent of Pearl 's equity , from FAI Insurances , a leading Australian insurance and investment group .
437	Australian Mutual received approval from the Department of Trade and Industry which it needed if it was to hold more than 15 per cent of Pearl 's shares , the level at which a shareholder is regarded as ‘ controlling ’ an insurance company .
438	At the time of the acquisition insurance analysts said that AMP had aspirations to expand , and since it controls one third of the Australian life insurance market its opportunities were limited in that country .
439	Earlier this year AMP acquired London Life , the mutual British life insurer , for just £15m which , with its own operations in the UK , gives it about a 1 per cent market share .
440	AMP would like 5 per cent of the life insurance market in Britain , which experts feel can only be achieved through acquisition .
441	Buying Pearl would give AMP a further market share of over 2 per cent .
442	Pearl was founded in 1864 and is the UK 's second largest life office after the Prudential which specialises in door-to-door collection of insurance premiums from customers .
443	Following legislative reforms , it has recently been making a big drive for personal pensions business which has proved successful .
444	In its last financial year ending December 1988 , Pearl reported pre-tax profits of £66.2m compared with £48.34m a year earlier .
445	Last month Pearl announced pre-tax profits for the six months ending 30 June of £31.1m , an increase of 8 per cent on the previous year .
446	The directors recommended that the dividend payout to shareholders should be increased by 25 per cent to 7.5p a share which was widely regarded as a move designed to ward off a takeover bid .
447	If Pearl decided to resist the overtures of AMP it will be the second major takeover battle in the British life assurance sector in barely two years .
448	In 1987 the Compagnie du Midi , the French financial and insurance group , moved to acquire British life insurer Equity &amp; Law , which was also under siege from the New Zealand entrepreneur Sir Ron Brierley , whose interests owned 29.6 per cent of Equity &amp; Law .
449	Equity &amp; Law finally recommended acceptance of the £448m takeover by the French group .
450	Japanese to buy 25% of Virgin
451	By MARY FAGAN
452	A JAPANESE company is to buy 25 per cent of the record business of the Virgin Group , which Richard Branson took private in October of last year .
453	Virgin , which owns the sixth largest record company worldwide , will make the formal announcement today in London , writes Mary Fagan .
454	The buyer is said not to be one of the large five record companies — Thorn EMI of the UK , Sony , Warner , Polygram and Bertelsman — which between them dominate 70 per cent of world sales .
455	Virgin last night refused to comment , but estimates are that the deal could be worth well in excess of £50m , making it one of the largest investments by a Japanese organisation in a UK company .
456	With a turnover of about £250m , Virgin Records is one of the few independents left in the music business .
457	In August the Virgin Group sold its film and video distribution arm , Virgin Vision , to Management Company Entertainment in the US .
458	But in spite of clear signals from Virgin Records that it wants to remain independent , speculation was rife that the purchaser might be Sony .
459	Industry observers fear that this would be another nail in the coffin of the independent record industry .
460	In 1988 the Japanese giant bought CBS records for $2bn and last week it announced that it would take control of Columbia pictures .
461	Virgin sources said yesterday , however : ‘ We want a minority partner .
462	The last thing we want is to lose our independence to one of the big five . ’
463	The deal is the latest in a spate of mergers and takeovers in the music publishing business .
464	Earlier this year , Thorn EMI paid £187m to US-based SBK for a large catalogue of songs , and subsequently also bought a half share in Chrysalis Records in the UK .
465	Since then , Polygram has bought Island Records and has anounced the takeover of A&amp;M records .
466	Both Virgin and Thorn EMI are thought to be vying for the lucrative Jobete in Detroit , which controls the publishing rights to a catalogue of 15,000 Motown titles .
467	The decision to look for a significant equity partner appears to be Virgin 's attempt to keep out of the clutches of the five majors while remaining a credible force in the worldwide music business .
468	Leading Article : Still a need for the big idea
469	By MARY FAGAN
470	NEIL Kinnock and the party he leads are looking better than they have done at any time since he took office in 1983 .
471	There will be ritual rebellion in Brighton from the Transport and General Workers Union over Labour 's belated renunciation of unilateral nuclear disarmament .
472	But Ron Todd , the union 's general secretary , is expected to concede defeat gracefully .
473	Even if other antinuclear fundamentalists threaten to fight , fight and fight again , Mr Kinnock need have no fear .
474	The more firmly he tells them and the country that , as Prime Minister , he and not they will rule , the more likely it is that he will eventually reach Downing Street .
475	On other issues , crucial victories have been won before the Labour Party 's annual conference opens .
476	Relatively few influential activists would now quarrel with the recognition that markets are an effective way of generating wealth and indicating consumer preferences .
477	Few want the wholesale repeal of industrial relations legislation .
478	Even the popular belief that the unions exercise too much power over Labour policies is gradually being accepted by a number of union leaders .
479	Paradoxically , the more moderate of them are insisting on the maintenance of their block votes because the party is still not fully democratic .
480	They see themselves exercising the restraining , moderating role they played in the 1940s and 1950s .
481	Once one-person-one-vote is accepted , some have already signalled a willingness to surrender much of their power .
482	Mr Kinnock hinted at the weekend that direct democracy was likely to become mandatory relatively soon .
483	To list the opponents of Mr Kinnock 's revisionist policies is to invite boredom and a sense of deja vu rather than any great fear .
484	The electorate has long since rumbled Tony Benn , Eric Heffer , Dennis Skinner , Ken Livingstone and the rest .
485	The prospect of Arthur Scargill entering Parliament invites mild derision rather than anxiety in the suburbs .
486	Potential Labour voters are coming to accept that an increasingly confident ( but mercifully less cocky ) Neil Kinnock has rumbled the fundamentalists too , and is neither impressed nor cowed by them .
487	In his pre-conference interview this weekend the Labour leader demonstrated a restrained confidence and authority which is new and , if it can be maintained in the heat of battle , likely to prove appealing to the sort of people whose votes he must win .
488	Even so there remain causes for concern in the Labour camp .
489	Yesterday , Labour 's leader dismissed both electoral reform and pacts .
490	Yet for Labour to win on its own at the next general election would be a victory on a scale comparable with that achieved by Attlee in 1945 .
491	Moreover , Mr Kinnock brushed aside the suggestion that he needed a big idea or unique selling point to challenge the appeal of Thatcherism .
492	He went on to say that there was nothing at all from the last decade for which he could give Mrs Thatcher credit .
493	The latter point was silly , coming from a man who has spent much of the last five years persuading his party that the world had changed since May 1979 and that there was no going back .
494	The former is debatable .
495	Mr Kinnock is a relatively recent convert to revisionism .
496	If he can produce no grand reason for abandoning left-wing Labour attitudes , people will be forgiven if they conclude that the change was cynical and opportunistic and that Mr Kinnock is more interested in gaining office than in doing anything in particular once he has arrived at the top .
497	This was not the basis on which Attlee reached No. 10 at the end of the war with a mandate to build a welfare state .
498	Work-out with the trolley freaks
499	By MILES KINGTON
500	DO YOU sometimes feel you should take more exercise ?
501	But just do n't seem to have the time or even the energy ?
502	Then the answer is to combine a fitness routine with something you 're doing already — and that 's why we 've come up with our great series of supermarket trolley exercises !
503	Yes , you can actually get all the body work-out you need while you 're just wheeling your shopping round your local supermarket .
504	That lump of metal on wheels can actually be the most useful exercise machine you ever meet — but ONLY if you know how to get the maximum use out of it .
505	And that 's why we asked Professor James Leotard , who researches Body Culture at Milton Keynes University , to devise a series of six simple trolley toning exercises .
506	Here they are .
507	1 .
508	When turning a corner into the next aisle of the shop , do n't tamely walk round behind the trolley and push it in the new direction .
509	Make the trolley turn ONLY by using the strength of your arms .
510	Tones up arms , shoulders and stomach .
511	2 .
512	Try to push and lift at the same time — go on , try to get the back wheels off the ground as you go along !
513	Not easy , is it , especially when you 've got the mineral water and bags of flour aboard ?
514	But it 's a lovely feeling when you finally find you can do it .
515	Excellent for arms , shoulders , legs , heart and best end .
516	3 .
517	Normally you would n't be seen dead doing a knees bend keeping your back straight , but if you 're getting something off the bottom shelf you wo n't look ridiculous at all .
518	Here 's how it goes .
519	You say : ‘ Ah , tinned water chestnuts .
520	Just what I need . ’
521	You go down , slowly , slowly , do n't rush it , pause five seconds , take the tin , then up .
522	Then you say : ‘ Ugh !
523	Preservatives ! ’ and do the same movements to replace the tin .
524	This can be repeated at every new shelf .
525	Wonderful for thighs , stomach , calves , hams and smoked bacon .
526	4 .
527	Lift yourself off the ground as you go along .
528	Go on , push yourself up on the handles and let the trolley take you for a ride , just like a child !
529	Fine for shoulders , arms , kidneys , liver and offal .
530	You meet lots of new people too .
531	5 .
532	Here 's one you can do when you 're waiting in that boring old queue .
533	Stand up straight .
534	Hold trolley at arm 's length .
535	Now , without moving your feet from where they are , let the trolley slowly roll away from you until you feel it start to go out of control — then pull it back .
536	This exercises all the muscles in the body , and in your neighbours ' as well ! 6 .
537	Finally , just try to wrench your trolley to pieces .
538	Go on , try to twist and buckle it with your bare hands .
539	Pull it apart .
540	Tear bits off it .
541	Turn it into the sort of jangled pile of metal the Tate Gallery would be glad to make an offer for .
542	You wo n't be able to make any impression with your bare hands , of course , unless you 're a trained weight lifter , but you 'll feel your body really working !
543	( A word of caution : watch out for that yoghurt on top . )
544	After a few weeks of this , I can guarantee you 'll be feeling quite a different person , and unable to wait to get out for your Sainsbury 's session , or your Waitrose-lifting !
545	When you hear the word shopping in future , your pulse will race and your red corpuscles will be off and away before you can say ‘ This Week 's Special Offer ’ .
546	Truly , your shopping list will become your freeway to fitness !
547	From Dr Armand Pastor GP Sir , I have started to get an extraordinary amount of patients with minor and sometimes major physical injuries caused by supermarket trolleys - pulled muscles , dislocated cartilages , broken fingers and limbs , ruptured yoghurt , etc .
548	My inquiries reveal that most of these are caused by exercise programmes devised by ignorant charlatans feeding off our need for health .
549	These fads for physical fitness invariably , in my experience , lead to two things : a great deal of unnecessary injury and a lot of profit to the people behind the scheme .
550	Mark my words , at this very moment someone is trying to cash in on this supermarket trolley fetish with some useless bit of equipment or other .
551	You just wait and see .
552	Yours fearfully AN ANNOUNCEMENT You know , your weekly visit to the supermarket is a good start .
553	But it is n't really enough to have a work-out on the trolley once every seven days , is it ?
554	So we have devised a genuine exercise supermarket-type trolley for you to use in your own home .
555	Styled in hard-wearing canadium , it has a built-in meter so that you can know at a glance if you 're applying enough pressure .
556	At last , you can go trolley training every day !
557	Give yourself a treat and go shopping for a new body with the INDEPENDENT TROLLEY TRAINER !
558	Only £179.99 .
559	( Warning : Not suitable for shopping . )
560	Leading Article : Morality and the market
561	By MILES KINGTON
562	THE Friends of Thatcherism are working themselves into a fine old lather about the interview given by the Archbishop of Canterbury to the magazine Director .
563	They regard the article as being primarily an attack on the Prime Minister , and one which is improper almost to the point of being constitutional .
564	They want the Prime Minister to use the Conservative Party conference next week to slap down this turbulent priest .
565	They are wrong on all counts .
566	It is the business of the head of the established church to express his worries about the state of the nation and the moral mood of the times .
567	It would be foolish and unseemly as well as counter-productive for the Prime Minister to enter into an undignified slanging match with him every time he does so .
568	If Dr Runcie sees self-interest , self-righteousness and an intolerant and uncharitable disregard for the unsuccessful and the unemployed , it is not merely his right but his duty to speak out .
569	If , further , he feels that the free market policies and values embraced by Mrs Thatcher have done much to create a divided nation , dominated by Pharisees , he should feel free to offer his opinion .
570	This is not , however , to say that Dr Runcie is correct .
571	In so far as the interview is a critique of Thatcherism — and that is not as far as might have been supposed from the headlines in yesterday 's papers — it is misplaced .
572	Rulers do not set the moral climate of their nations except , perhaps , at the extremes .
573	Hitler and Stalin debauched the moral climates of Germany and Russia respectively .
574	But it would be hard to argue , say , that Greeks are less moral because of the appalling corruption of and greed demonstrated by senior figures in the government and party of the socialist Andreas Papandreou .
575	Dr Runcie acknowledged that ‘ wealth creation ’ was the necessary precondition for ‘ doing all the things we ought to do ’ but added that there was no automatic connection between wealth creation and a happy society .
576	Amen to that .
577	Market economics is about efficiency , not morality .
578	Government can do much to set the boundaries in which it is possible to create wealth .
579	It is for others to offer moral guidance to the newly prosperous Pharisees .
580	The latter need not wait for a change of heart on the part of the Prime Minister , or the election of a new government , before translating guilt about the condition of those less fortunate than themselves into action .
581	There are numerous worthy charities , many run by the church which Dr Runcie heads , in need of donations of money or skills .
582	It is possible to love , and to aid , thy neighbour without state intervention .
583	If people are unwilling to recognise this it represents a failure of church leadership rather than political leadership .
584	Letter : Full-cost fees for students
585	From Mr JONATHAN INGLESFIELD
586	Sir : I refer to Peter Wilby 's Viewpoint ( 29 September ) .
587	The proposals for student fees hold especially worrying implications for the training of doctors in the UK .
588	I am 22 , but I will not be able to earn my first salary until I reach 24 .
589	From that time , I will be obliged to pay off an ever-increasing student loan .
590	It now appears that , in addition to this , I will be expected to part with a further portion of my income as a graduate tax to pay for my education , the last three years of which I am spending in hospitals , not only studying , but assisting on a voluntary basis with essential clinical procedures and tests .
591	It seems odd that I should be expected to pay for the privilege of assisting in this way , in particular , as I doubt that these changes will alleviate the falling numbers of applicants to medical schools in the UK .
592	Letter : Full-cost fees for students
593	From Professor The EARL RUSSELL
594	Sir : The Vice Chancellors ' proposal ( 29 September ) to charge students full-cost fees will doubtless create protests .
595	But these protests should not be aimed at the Vice Chancellors .
596	They are undoubtedly right that it has now become clear that the Government will not pay for the expansion it desires at a level which will protect high quality .
597	Though the powers of Vice Chancellors are considerable , they do not include the power to make two and two make five .
598	They can not deal with this situation by cutting quality : in a university , quality is the object of the exercise , and a university which sets out to lower quality is no more likely to survive than an army which sets out to lose its battles .
599	Faced with a persistent excess of expenditure over income , they may cut student numbers or they may increase income .
600	Since it seems they are not to be permitted to cut student numbers , they are attempting to increase income .
601	However , to say all other courses are impossible is not to say this course is possible .
602	The Vice Chancellors are looking for scholarships to meet these fees , and money for those scholarships may come from government , industry , benefactors or private individuals .
603	If the Government were likely to meet the full cost , the proposal would be unnecessary .
604	Industry is in no position to undertake a surcharge on its costs , and will probably reply , as it has just done on the question of arts funding , that industrial sponsorship is a supplement to government funding : it is not available as a substitute for it .
605	A record balance of payments deficit is not the right background for enforced increases in industrial costs .
606	We lack rich benefactors , and the Private Sector Borrowing Requirement , which last year had reached £200bn for mortgages , and £36.4bn for credit cards and hire purchase suggests that the private purse is no more inexhaustible than the public .
607	The plan to raise full-cost fees is likely to fail .
608	The problem will then return to the Government 's desk , and I hope it will then accept that the country can have no more universities , and no more university places , than it can afford .
609	Letter : Policy and politics at the Labour Party Conference
610	From MR DAVID SOSKIN
611	Sir : I was interested by your juxtaposition of ‘ Poll predicts 42-seat majority for Labour ’ with ‘ Tories hold on ’ ( 30 September ) , the latter referring , of course , to the Conservative victory in Wandsworth , the significance of which appears to have been almost totally ignored by the media .
612	Electors are always prepared to criticise the Government in answer to pollsters ' questions , but when the same individuals arrive at the polling booth they simply can not bring themselves to vote Labour into power .
613	Letter : Policy and politics at the Labour Party Conference
614	From MS MOLLY MEACHER
615	Sir : Despite a significant gap in the Labour Party 's education and training proposals , their objective to double the number of 16-18year-olds in full-time education must be welcomed ( 28 September ) .
616	England 's full-time staying-on rate stands at 28 per cent according to the latest statistics available .
617	This compares with 79 per cent in the US , 86 per cent in Sweden , 45 per cent in West Germany and 69 per cent in Japan .
618	To add the part-time education and training statistics to those figures does not improve our relative position .
619	Labour hopes to transform the situation by increasing the number of A-levels to five for the brighter youngsters and providing grants for four-year training courses ( two years in a Further Education college followed by two with an employer ) for the rest .
620	These reforms will only achieve their objective if accompanied by the implementation of the 1944 Education Act provision for compulsory part- or full-time education or training up to the age of 18 .
621	This clause has never yet been activated .
622	The sharply reduced number of 16-18-year-olds will inevitably lead employers to bid up the wages of that age group to entice young people away from education and into unskilled or semi-skilled jobs .
623	Employers must be required to release 16-18-year-olds for education and training for at least two days per week .
624	Only then will two vitally important and complementary goals be achieved : to improve Britain 's general educational and vocational competence , and hence our productive capacity ; and to reduce our gross educational inequalities between the elite who receive a narrow education to a very high standard , and the rest .
625	Letter : Policy and politics at the Labour Party Conference
626	From MR JOHN PERTWEE
627	Sir : Labour does not need a commitment to proportional representation in order to scoop most of the centre ground at the next general election .
628	All it needs is to promise a high-powered investigation , such as a Royal Commission , into the practicalities of an alternative voting system ( surely justified by the intense public interest now abounding ) .
629	Such a promise would be the only hope of a breakthrough for the disenfranchised voters and would have them flocking to the polls for Mr Kinnock .
630	His problem will be that Mrs Thatcher might decide to do it first , and then she will garner the votes .
631	Letter : Policy and politics at the Labour Party Conference
632	From MR DENIS MacSHANE
633	Sir : If Labour is to suggest the setting up of a specialist labour court ( 30 September ) , then such a momentous change in the industrial relations system deserves more discussion , and needs to be taken out of the hot-house of Labour Party conference politics .
634	For three reasons such a move should be welcomed .
635	First , it would bring Britain into line with the best European practice , notably in Germany where local , regional and federal labour courts handle problems in a fair , dispassionate way based on law , precedent and judicial expertise in the labour field .
636	Second , it would ensure that workers enjoyed positive rights under law and reduce the emphasis of union immunities .
637	Labour law will always reflect the balance of power in society , and a fully fledged labour court system will not remove class and fundamental employer-employee differences .
638	But it should be possible to create and enforce enough common rules to prevent the absurd see-sawing of industrial relations legislation we have seen since 1969 .
639	Third , a labour division of the High Court would contribute to the process of constitutional reform in Britain which surely is to be a key political issue in the 1990s .
640	The ‘ trade union question ’ would cease to haunt the Labour Party and while that might upset some Conservatives it would be good for the country .
641	Letter : Independence of no-fixed-abode
642	From The Rev NERISSA JONES
643	Sir : On Saturday you published an advertisement for the 10 extra pages of news and features that you , The Independent , will carry from 2 October .
644	‘ What do independent experts say about our 10 extra pages ? ’ asks the advertisement .
645	The supposedly jokey answers are illustrated by photographs of people sleeping outside covered by copies of The Independent : they look like some of the hundreds of visitors who come to St Botolph 's Crypt Centre for homeless people every day .
646	Given the already appalling and growing rate of homelessness and lack of hostel facilities in London , when more people than ever will not only have to endure the freezing nights of the coming winter on the streets , but perhaps permanent homelessness , it was terrible to see the situation being exploited for a joke by your advertisement : ‘ Just the thing now the evenings are drawing in .
647	. ‘ ‘ The added coverage is exactly what I wanted ’ .
648	How much ‘ independence ’ do you suppose a person has who exists on the no-fixed-abode Giro of £34.90 a week ?
649	Letter : EC immigration checks on trains
650	From The Rev J. GILMORE
651	Sir : The contents of Sarah Helm 's article ‘ Immigration checks to be made on trains ’ ( 25 September ) are extremely worrying .
652	During the recent European Community elections the representatives of EC governments promoted the ideal of a border-free Europe by 1992 .
653	Now , it would appear from this article , that this ideal is shattered and a two-tiered Europe is on the cards .
654	One for those who travel by aircraft and one for those who travel by train between London and Paris .
655	The presence of immigration officials and police on board trains is comparable to the scenes of 1930s America where migrant labourers were turned back at state boundaries .
656	What criteria would police and immigration officials use in their search for ‘ potential terrorists ’ on a train that they could not use at a static checkpoint or airport ?
657	Do terrorists or illegal persons travel exclusively by train ?
658	This is a clear example of the extension of the Prevention of Terrorism Act where criteria for stopping , questioning and searching are purely subjective to the official involved .
659	Will a person 's accent , dress or skin colour indicate the potential terrorist or , for that matter , football hooligan or drug pusher ?
660	This is a recipe for fear and anxiety .
661	It may mean the detention of innocent people and indeed their imprisonment .
662	Letter : Cardinal sins
663	From Mr JIMMY DONOGHUE
664	Sir : The North-east publishers of Viz are nearer the truth than they realise with their soccer strip ( 29 September ) .
665	Cardinal Hume has not only the cross of being a fervent Newcastle United supporter to bear ; he is also known to irreverent members of Mayfair 's Jesuit Farm Street Church by his initials , George Basil Hume .
666	Letter : Bruges and the future of a federal Europe
667	From Mr ALAN HASELHURST MP
668	Sir : William Cash ( letter , 26 September ) suggests that democracy is at risk through our continued membership of the European Community .
669	He even implies that those who sacrificed themselves in the Second World War are in danger of being betrayed .
670	His distrust of federalism has to be very great to make such absurd claims .
671	The United Kingdom signed the Treaty of Rome of her own free will .
672	Those of us who helped constitute the large House of Commons majority in favour of the principle of joining the community did so with our eyes open .
673	We actively desired an ever closer union of the European peoples , but it was not laid down how and when this was to be achieved .
674	It was a matter first of embarking on practical ways of increasing harmony and creating a single market .
675	Mr Cash is convinced he knows where this is all leading .
676	I am not aware of any preconceived plan .
677	Proposals for economic and monetary union are just another phase of the journey .
678	Doubtless , in time , we will consider adjusting the democratic framework to suit new circumstances .
679	In an interdependent world , the inability of a national state to exercise effective control of its own affairs has long been apparent .
680	How each generation of parliamentarians in member states will try to guide the community 's political institutions will be for them to determine .
681	I suspect the evolutionary process will be lengthy .
682	Mr Cash and his Friends of Bruges seem to want to fight a battle against federalism today which may not have to be fought at all .
683	In any case , what is inherently undemocratic about federalism ?
684	The Americans manage quite well .
685	The terrors which Mr Cash expresses about our future in the community have a familiar ring about them .
686	Nationalists in Scotland say much the same thing about being part of the UK .
687	Those of us who want the Scottish people to stay in the UK can see nothing logically wrong or abhorrent in the UK developing its constitutional relationship with its community partners .
688	Finally to cite the independence movement in Eastern Europe as the antithesis of what is happening in the community is the ultimate absurdity .
689	Countries such as the Baltic states hardly signed up with the Soviet Union as free agents .
690	It is small wonder that they want out .
691	Once armed with that freedom they might surprise Mr Cash by also seeking membership of the community .
692	Letter : ‘ Inexplicable ’ libel awards
693	From Mr ROGER COOMBS
694	Sir : Marcel Berlins ( ' Good men and generous ' ; Law , 29 September ) calls the absurdly high awards made by juries in libel actions ‘ inexplicable ’ .
695	The most probable reason , considering the fanciful and irresponsible way the tabloid press operates these days , is a wish to punish newspapers for libel in a way that hurts and deters .
696	This could be done more effectively if the law was changed so that it became the jury 's responsibility to assess only the actual damage to the plaintiff and the judge 's responsibility to impose an unlimited fine on the defendants according to his view of their culpability .
697	Letter : Portrait of a nation 's values
698	From Dr BEVERLEY HALSTEAD
699	Sir : A nation 's perception of itself and its values are reflected in the portraits on its banknotes .
700	Ours currently extol the virtues of Britain 's response to the French Revolution ( £5 ) , remind us of our traditional relationship with Russia ( £10 ) , the danger implicit in teenage romance ( £20 ) and the importance of our architectural heritage ( £50 ) .
701	The withdrawal of the pound note with Sir Isaac Newton leaves no place in the nation 's pockets for science .
702	Would it not be appropriate for this situation to be remedied by putting Charles Darwin on a new £100 note to emphasise to the world , in these uncertain times , our tradition of change by evolution and not revolution ?
703	Letter : Recycling waste
704	From Professor R. A. SMITH
705	Sir : Your reports today quite rightly praise the efforts being made in Sheffield to extract energy from waste and to recycle paper , glass , plastics and steel cans .
706	Much as I wanted to read the good news on my walk home from the newspaper shop , I was forced to concentrate on my footing on broken and delapidated pavements , strewn with take-away food rubbish , wrappings of all kinds , and collections of weeds , heaps of dog dirt and drinks cans .
707	In a few weeks ' time , the fallen leaves will have risen from ankle to knee deep .
708	It is a wonderful thing to spend one 's everyday existence paddling in a cesspool of untapped energy .
709	BOOK REVIEW / Unhappy and glorious : ‘ Churchill 's Black Dog ’ -Anthony Storr : Collins , 16 pounds
710	By MICHAEL CHURCH
711	ISAAC NEWTON , Franz Kafka and Winston Churchill were , as infants , united in common misfortune : physically puny and starved of parental love , each was condemned to a lifelong wrestle with potentially annihilating depression .
712	In their achievement as adults — each imposing his order on an external world he made his own — they were united in triumph .
713	Anthony Storr 's project , in this collection of essays , is to use psychoanalytical principles to show how in each case weakness produced strength .
714	The fullest and most fascinating case study is that of Churchill , whose famous ‘ Black Dog ’ depressions are shown to have sprung ineluctably from childhood traumas .
715	Comparing him to Demosthenes , in whom oratory compensated for a speech impediment , Storr juxtaposes two key scenes : young Winston being pelted with cricket balls and hiding behind a tree , and a slightly older Winston terrifying his friends ( and all but killing himself ) by jumping 30 ft off a bridge .
716	Until the day he died Churchill kept a photograph of his nanny by his bed .
717	His mother had had no time for him , and his father disapproved of him .
718	As Storr points out , he only felt entitled to love insofar as his deeds merited it : deprived of the total , irrational acceptance which loved children routinely enjoy , he was doomed to an endless pursuit of this ideal state , but never with any real hope of success .
719	‘ This can not be accident , it must be design , ’ he commented when at the age of 65 his great hour came .
720	‘ I was kept for this job . ’
721	Churchill had at moments in the First World War manifested great strategic prescience ; his intuition swung into action even more powerfully the second time round .
722	Rational judgement might have told him that the nation 's plight was hopeless , but his was the vision of an avenging prophet .
723	‘ It is probable , ’ Storr observes , ‘ that England owed her survival in 1940 to this inner world of make-believe . ’
724	What psychoanalysis calls fantasies of infantile omnipotence thus came into play , together with other attributes of infantility — greed , paranoia , and an inability to follow complex rational arguments .
725	Churchill demanded that all ideas be submitted to him on a half-sheet of paper ; he was frequently insensitive , a bad judge of character , and a sucker for flamboyant charlatans ; intensely loyal , he demanded uncritical loyalty in return .
726	The end of the war meant the end of the blissful congruence between fantasy and reality , and Churchill turned to painting and writing in an effort to regain that happy state .
727	But as Storr demonstrates with the aid of two stunningly beautiful passages from Churchill 's early novel Savrola , the pen was better suited to delineating the bleak impotence he felt at his innermost core .
728	Franz Kafka perfectly exemplifies the efficacy of art in counteracting emotional wounds , if not in healing them .
729	He felt powerless in the face of his father , and was cursed with the unshakeable conviction that he was to be punished throughout life for some unspecified crime .
730	Anthony Storr shows how these depressive fears were magically transmuted in the literary sphere .
731	Kafka 's gift to posterity lay not in any facile adumbration of the Nazi concentration camps , but in his ability to articulate terrors which we all have lurking in the recesses of our minds .
732	Newton spent more time and energy on alchemical speculations than on the scientific discoveries which galvanised the Western world : Storr reconstructs the neurotic drive which impelled him to heroic intellectual feats .
733	Like Einstein he distrusted the senses , like many philosophers he was incapable of sustaining close emotional relationships , and within his cloistered concentration miracles took place .
734	‘ I keep the subject constantly before me , and wait till the first dawnings open slowly by little and little into the full and clear light . ’
735	This chapter makes heartening reading , as does the entire book .
736	Churchill 's Black Dog may be marred by cut-price literary criticism , and its construction may be slapdash , but its armature is a belief that people can , by an act of creative will , save their souls at any stage , that fundamental personal change is possible after 40 , 50 , even 60 .
737	As our population grows older , this is an idea whose time has come .
738	What Kinnock must say : Giles Radice on the Labour leader 's opportunity to set the political agenda
739	By GILES RADICE
740	NEIL KINNOCK 'S speech at the Labour Party conference tomorrow will be the most important he has ever made .
741	For the first time since he became leader , he is in the position to set the political agenda .
742	As he prepares his text , he might recall Harold Wilson 's speech to the 1963 Scarborough conference .
743	After 12 years in power , the Tories had run out of steam .
744	Wilson 's task was to project his party as an alternative government and associate Labour with the agenda of the 1960s .
745	He succeeded triumphantly .
746	His ‘ white heat ’ speech not only demonstrated that he was aware of the scientific revolution that was changing Britain but also associated Labour with efficiency , modernisation and planning .
747	Labour won the 1964 election and was in power for 11 of the next 15 years .
748	As in 1963 , so today there is a strong sense that the tide is turning .
749	But the Tories still have time to recover , especially if they jettison some of the more unattractive aspects of Thatcherism .
750	Mr Kinnock 's job at conference must be to demonstrate Labour 's electability by confirming the party 's new revisionism , by reassuring voters on issues where there is still doubt and , above all , by helping set the agenda for the 1990s .
751	The party has abandoned policies which made it unelectable in the 1980s .
752	It is no longer the party of traditional nationalisation ; it is no longer anti-European ; above all , it is no longer unilateralist .
753	Mr Kinnock must stress the extent to which Labour has really changed .
754	Defence , which lost Labour so many votes in 1983 and 1987 , is especially important .
755	Here Mr Kinnock should set out clearly why , in the Gorbachev era , negotiated rather than unilateral disarmament is almost always preferable .
756	On the economy , there is still work to do .
757	Polls show that , despite impressive performances by John Smith and Gordon Brown , many voters still believe Labour is a party of high taxation and inflation .
758	But there is strong support for sensible increases in public spending , provided this does not lead to massive hikes in taxation .
759	The party has to emphasise that , in contrast to the Tories , it believes public spending should rise in line with growth in output , but that it will pursue responsible fiscal policies .
760	Labour 's hand on inflation would be strengthened if its leader were able to announce that it now supported early British entry into the exchange rate mechanism of the European monetary system .
761	Mr Kinnock will also have to clarify several confusions in policy .
762	He should repeat his assurance that , while Labour is opposed to the privatisation of water and electricity and wants to see a return to public control , it is not the party 's intention to clobber those who buy shares .
763	Muddle over trades union legislation must also be cleared up .
764	UK employees , among the least protected in Europe , need more extensive statutory rights .
765	But that does not mean the repeal of all Conservative legislation , nor that unions should be immune from penalties .
766	It is essential that the modern Labour Party should not be in hock to the unions .
767	But perhaps Mr Kinnock 's most important task next week is to look forward .
768	Labour 's acceptance of the market strengthens the increasingly powerful case for government intervening selectively .
769	The classic example of market failure is environmental protection .
770	Education and training and research and development are other areas where government intervention is badly needed .
771	The dilapidation of our transport system and the shoddy state of our national services underlines the argument for more public investment .
772	Labour 's change of policy on the European Community puts it in a strong position to argue that economic and industrial decisions are increasingly likely to be made on a European basis and it is essential that Britain plays a more constructive role .
773	We shall need to develop , for example , a viable policy on economic and monetary union .
774	At the time when Poland has its first Solidarity prime minister , Hungary is to have free elections , and Britain is fed up with Mrs Thatcher 's authoritarian style , Labour should be seen to take democratic issues seriously .
775	I am disappointed the policy review has adopted such a negative attitude both to a Bill of Rights and electoral reform .
776	A new agenda , centred on citizens ' rights and democratic reform , selective government intervention , environmental protection and a more positive role in Europe would provide the basis for a new progressive majority .
777	It must be Mr Kinnock 's task this week to capture this new agenda for Labour and set the party on the path to power .
778	Disturbingly quiet on the Western front
779	By WILLIAM REES-MOGG
780	THE HISTORIC roots of culture are extremely deep .
781	I can remember sitting at Professor Hayek 's feet in the company of Margaret Thatcher , a fellow disciple .
782	Yet I do not doubt that Aristotle and St Paul have done more to frame the Prime Minister 's mind and therefore the destiny of her Government than any thinkers who have been dead for less than 1,900 years .
783	The great dead have framed our culture : our culture shapes our political life ; therefore the great dead have shaped our political life .
784	If one wants to explore the possibilities of Europe 's political future , one needs therefore to examine the development of European culture .
785	I have tried to focus such an examination by playing the parlour game of making a list of the 50 Europeans who have most influenced the consciousness of Europe in the last 1,000 years .
786	Such a proceeding is , of course , arbitrary to the point of being ridiculous .
787	I have excluded from my list politicians as such — hence the absence of Napoleon — but have allowed in Lenin and Hitler because they largely invented their own ideologies .
788	I have no doubt excluded towering figures who ought to have been included , and included some less important .
789	To have found no space for Scott , Kant , Gibbon , Pushkin , Copernicus , Boyle , Pope , Nietzsche and Racine will seem to many to have been an impertinence .
790	From the lists I made , I came to feel that European culture in the last millennium may have had some 100 real heroes , the mastersingers of Europe , of which I have tried to identify half .
791	However , at least 10 of my cultural heroes would appear on almost all lists , and perhaps 30 would appear on most .
792	Nobody could deny the place of Michelangelo , Shakespeare , Newton , Mozart or Voltaire in the firmament of European culture .
793	I was surprised by two conclusions that came from making such a list .
794	I had not expected the twentieth century to show such a steep decline both in numbers and in quality , though I was less surprised to see the cultural importance of the nineteenth century .
795	I was also surprised to see how great the Germanic contribution to European culture had been .
796	No doubt one could easily design a more Francophone list , but with nine Germans and three Austrians , the German-language contribution was close in number to the 13 English-language and outnumbered the eight French .
797	In this field there are two common ideas , of which one is true and the other is false .
798	The true idea is that Italy is the cradle of European civilisation .
799	Italy , as the centre of the Roman world , conveyed the classical idea to a barbarian Europe ; Rome , as the site of papacy , propagated the faith of the Catholic Church .
800	Down to the end of the fifteenth century , Italians dominate European culture in literature , in science , in scholarship , in painting and in architecture .
801	The Renaissance is an Italian phenomenon which spread to the rest of Europe .
802	The false idea is that French culture took over the leading position of Italy .
803	That was divided between Britain , Germany and France and the other nations in more or less equal proportions .
804	Britain probably made the greatest contribution in literature and science , Germany certainly in music , while in the late nineteenth century , France dominated the world of painting .
805	The enlightenment was split between France and Scotland .
806	The Netherlands provided Erasmus , Rembrandt and Van Gogh .
807	Judaism produced Marx , Freud and Einstein , none of them Orthodox but all influenced by Jewish culture .
808	Spain provided two saints , out of a total of five ; I was sorry to leave out Thomas More , though he was clearly a less important European influence than Erasmus .
809	What is horrifying is the decline in our own century .
810	Again I am suspicious of my own bias of taste .
811	I am not a modernist , though I presided at the Arts Council with liberal equanimity over the public funding of much modernist art which I did not understand .
812	Yet in other centuries I was being forced to omit , for sheer lack of space , figures of the highest cultural importance .
813	There was no room for Haydn or Hume in the eighteenth century , for Verdi or even Dostoevsky in the nineteenth .
814	Examining the twentieth century was like having to apply a quota to allow the underprivileged into college .
815	It is also true that the twentieth century list contained more than its fair share of abnormal personalities .
816	The general impression conveyed by the earlier centuries is one of wisdom , harmony , humanity .
817	Not perhaps in the cases of Wagner or Rousseau , but in the general run of Europe 's cultural heroes .
818	In the twentieth century only Einstein and Stravinsky have undamaged personalities ; the others are in varying degrees diabolical , mad , bad , neurotic , tragic or agonised .
819	That has not prevented them exercising a great influence on our cultural development .
820	They are also all dead .
821	There is no twentieth-century master who belongs to the second half of this century .
822	Europe experienced in the first half of the twentieth century a simultaneous cultural , spiritual and political breakdown .
823	The political breakdown was manifested in the two world wars , in the Holocaust , in the severity of the slump , in the doctrines of Nazism and totalitarian communism , both of which were a defilement of human nature .
824	That breakdown was reflected in the art of the period , which — as in Francis Bacon — partly protested and partly rejoiced in the excremental quality of the age .
825	Now all is quiet on the Western front .
826	The European mind has no great spokesman .
827	There are philosophers , but no great philosopher , composers , but no great composer , poets , but no great poet , painters , but no great painter .
828	After the storm of the breakdown , Europe is in a period of convalescence , perhaps sedated convalescence .
829	Yet at least the storm does seem to be over , and the peasants are picking up fallen sticks in the devastated forest .
830	50 Mastersingers of Europe 13th century : Thomas Aquinas Italy ; Francis of Assisi Italy ; Dante Alighieri Italy 14th century : Geoffrey Chaucer Britain 15th century : Joan of Arc France ; Michelangelo Buonarroti Italy ; Christopher Columbus Italy ; Johann Gutenberg Germany ; Leonardo da Vinci Italy 16th century : Teresa of Avila Spain ; Desiderius Erasmus Netherlands ; Ignatius Loyola Spain ; Martin Luther Germany ; Niccolo Machiavelli Italy ; Michel de Montaigne France ; William Shakespeare Britain 17th century : Francis Bacon Britain ; Rene Descartes France ; Galileo Galilei Italy ; John Locke Britain ; Moliere France ; Isaac Newton Britain ; Rembrandt Van Rijn Netherlands 18th century : Johann Sebastian Bach Germany ; Johann Wolfgang Von Goethe Germany ; Samuel Johnson Britain ; Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart Austria ; Jean-Jacques Rousseau Switzerland ; Adam Smith Britain ; Voltaire France 19th century : Jane Austen Britain ; Ludwig Van Beethoven Germany ; Paul Cezanne France ; Charles Darwin Britain ; Charles Dickens Britain ; Vincent van Gogh Netherlands ; George Gordon , Lord Byron Britain ; Georg Hegel Germany ; Victor Hugo France ; Thomas Robert Malthus Britain ; Karl Marx Germany ; Leo , Count Tolstoy Russia ; Richard Wagner Germany 20th century : Albert Einstein Germany ; Sigmund Freud Austria ; Adolf Hitler Austria ; James Joyce Ireland ; Lenin Russia ; Pablo Picasso Spain ; Igor Stravinsky Russia
831	Monument to the power of the gun : Andrew Higgins revisits Tiananmen Square for communist China 's 40th birthday party
832	By ANDREW HIGGINS
833	At a distance — the only vantage allowed anyone except soldiers and carefully vetted civilians — it could almost be the Goddess of Democracy .
834	Sculpted from white plaster like the students ' statue , the new monument has been erected on the spot where the democracy movement 's impertinent icon of defiance stood until the People 's Liberation Army arrived on 4 June .
835	For the few considered politically reliable enough to get a closer look , there can be no mistake .
836	The 25 ft statue marking the 40th anniversary of the People 's Republic of China is an altogether different creature from its smashed predecessor .
837	Far from mimicking the Statue of Liberty , the new statue holds a gun — not just any gun but an AK-47 , the weapon used by the army to blast its way into Peking .
838	Its barrel , pointed by a helmeted soldier , is sticking into the chest of a worker in overalls .
839	A peasant stands next to them ; behind is a bespectacled intellectual .
840	Tiananmen Square may have been ‘ handed back to the people ’ , according to Peking 's mayor , Chen Xitong , but , as the statue makes clear , real power comes not from the people but from the gun .
841	In an unsubtle reminder of the importance of firepower , Deng Xiaoping and other Chinese leaders gathered in Tiananmen last night to celebrate the 40th birthday of ‘ new China ’ with a deafening display of pyrotechnics .
842	For more than an hour , rockets exploded across the sky — an extravaganza that for many Peking residents recalled not so much the glory of the revolution as the tracer bullets and machine-gun fire of early June .
843	If the Goddess of Democracy symbolised a vision of China alien to the Communist Party , the new figures are equally alien to the students : the obedience of the intellectual and unflinching solidarity of the ‘ workers , peasants and soldiers ’ .
844	Ironically , neither of these visions is Chinese .
845	While the students looked to the West , China 's hardline leadership has found its inspiration in the pre-glasnost Soviet Union of Stalinist aesthetics - muscular arms , square jaws and stiff poses .
846	The official blurb explains that the plaster figures ‘ stand as if boldly forging ahead , their eyes fixed on our motherland 's beautiful future ’ .
847	Perhaps unwittingly , the new statue hints at a deeper truth underpinning the hardline triumph : the worker , the peasant and the intellectual gaze wistfully towards the Forbidden City , the grandest monument to the genius of Chinese civilisation , but the soldier has his eyes fixed in a different direction — down the Avenue of Eternal Peace towards Zhongnanhai , the walled compound where party leaders live and work .
848	For as Mao decreed , if power grows from the barrel of a gun , it is the party that must control , and if necessary use , that gun .
849	Four months after the People 's Liberation Army stormed central Peking with the loss of hundreds of lives , few can have any doubt about the party 's determination to enforce this Maoist maxim .
850	As many as 100,000 soldiers are still encamped around Peking .
851	Soldiers stand guard on street corners and roam the city at night .
852	Occasional gunshots can still be heard , though no one seems to know who fires the guns and if anyone is hit .
853	The leaders remain haunted by the forces of dissent they ordered the army to crush .
854	Across China there has been a ritualistic cleansing to erase the symbols of the student movement .
855	Noticeboards have been scrubbed clean of posters , walls of daubed slogans and minds of memories of what really happened .
856	Imitating the students ' tactics , the party has ordered shops and houses be strung with banners praising the ‘ great and glorious Communist Party of China ’ .
857	And , again like the students , it has issued an official list of permitted slogans , ordering citizens to memorise 40 different chants to mark the 40th anniversary of communist rule .
858	Not as stirring as the protest movement 's shouts of ‘ long live democracy , down with autocracy ’ , they include cumbersome chants hailing ‘ the great achievement of socialism ’ and ‘ warmly hail the victory over the turmoil and counter-revolutionary rebellion ’ .
859	Nowhere has the leadership struggled to exorcise the memory of the student- led revolt as in Tiananmen itself , the symbolic heart of the nation where , on 1 October 1949 , Mao Tse-tung proclaimed the People 's Republic of China .
860	The students who occupied the square for three weeks in May and early June have been banished .
861	So , too , has anyone without the special pass needed to get through military cordons .
862	The Monument to the People 's Heroes , the stone obelisk in the middle of the square where student leaders had their ‘ command centre ’ , has been declared a forbidden zone because it is felt to have been contaminated by the students ' presence .
863	In an attempt at gaiety before the national day , fairy lights were strung on trees where political banners and cartoons lampooning the leaders once hung .
864	There is no doubt now who controls the square .
865	China 's leaders have become so fearful of revolt that Tiananmen is guarded round the clock by uniformed soldiers with guns while the rest of Peking remains firmly under martial law .
866	Scores of Tiananmen 's paving stones have been replaced to remove the evidence of anti-government messages .
867	Others have been covered with flower pots to hide the traces of the student occupation or scars left by the tracks of tanks and armoured personnel carriers .
868	Try as the leadership might to erase what happened , nothing can be done to change the one fact on which the future of China turns : the men who ordered the assault on Tiananmen Square will surely die long before the youth they ordered to be killed .
869	Deng Xiaoping is 85 , and while apparently in reasonably good health , will not outlive the instigators of the ‘ counter-revolutionary rebellion ’ .
870	Other veteran revolutionaries on whose longevity the current leadership depends are all in their eighties .
871	Some , like the hardline godfather Chen Yun , are so infirm they are rarely seen in public .
872	Others do occasionally venture out but are painful to watch .
873	At a state banquet on the eve of the national day in the Great Hall of the People , the head tables were cluttered with ageing revolutionaries slumped in their seats .
874	When Li Peng , the Prime Minister , tried to share a toast with his adoptive mother , the venerable widow of Chou En-lai , he was met with an uncomprehending stare .
875	In desperation , he finally raised not only his own glass but also hers — a graphic reminder of how fragile the veterans ' , and by association Mr Li 's own , power may turn out to be .
876	But if they are physically weak , the old guard remain politically strong .
877	Refighting the battles of their own youth , they have tried to fix China 's eyes firmly on the past .
878	The party may claim to be in the vanguard of history , but its clock seems to have stopped in the 1950s .
879	Propaganda campaigns , class struggle , the cult of the model worker and even the almost evangelical rhetoric of the cold war are all back with a vengeance .
880	Television and newspapers no longer praise model entrepreneurs but heroic labourers such as Zhang Fuxin , praised for throwing himself into a pit of polluted mud to retrieve a piece of equipment .
881	People are told that Mr Zhang was so dedicated that he cut short his honeymoon to return to work , telling his new wife : ‘ One day without hearing the sound of the drill , my heart is heavy .
882	One day without wearing work clothes , it 's as if I lack something .
883	I feel ill at ease . ’
884	In deference to ageing stalwarts , the Communist Party 's new leader , Jiang Zemin , recently made a pilgrimage to Yenan , the remote village where the Red Army took refuge at the end of the Long March .
885	The future of China , he pronounced , depends on reviving the ‘ Yenan spirit ’ of hard work and plain living .
886	So strong is the nostalgia , that Mao , Chou En-lai and other founders of ‘ new China ’ often seem to have returned from the dead .
887	The front page of the People 's Daily and every other major national newspaper last week featured a picture of the new Politburo standing committee meeting with actors from a People 's Liberation Army theatre troupe made up to look like the dead founding fathers .
888	Mao lookalikes also dominate the cinema .
889	The country 's best known Mao impersonator , an actor called Gu Yue , has made a startling comeback in a new 90-minute epic portraying the last months of China 's civil war .
890	In a further nod of respect to the great helmsman , his portrait on the Forbidden City has been given a new look .
891	Already replaced once in June after being splattered with paint , it was replaced again last week with a new painting featuring a bluer sky .
892	In Peking at least , the resurrection of past models and heroes has provoked more giggling than respect , spawning a rash of political jokes .
893	Take for example the peasant who visits the mausoleum housing Mao 's corpse in Tiananmen Square .
894	‘ Where is Mao ?
895	I want to talk to him , ’ he says to the guard at the door .
896	‘ You ca n't talk to him ; he 's dead , ’ replies the guard .
897	After touring the mausoleum , the peasant returns and again asks where he can find Mao alive .
898	Again the guard replies that he is dead .
899	The peasant then walks past the corpse for a second time and emerges to ask the same question .
900	‘ I told you , he 's been dead for years , ’ the guard snaps .
901	‘ I know , ’ the peasant answers , ‘ but I just love to hear you say it . ’
902	Another joke is about a student marching down the Avenue of Eternal Peace with a banner saying ‘ Li Peng is a pig ’ .
903	The student is arrested , tried and sentenced to 20 years .
904	He complains that illegal protests carry a maximum sentence of five years .
905	‘ Yes , ’ replies the judge .
906	‘ Five years for an illegal protest and 15 for revealing state secrets . ’
907	Such is the mood of quiet irreverence and anger that street hawkers have begun selling buttons with the two-finger victory sign that became the symbol of the student movement .
908	As an ingenious precaution against charges of ‘ counter-revolutionary ’ tendencies , the buttons carry a small legend : ‘ Victory ! — I climbed the Great Wall of China . ’
909	Tigrayans advance on a helpless Addis Ababa
910	From RICHARD DOWDEN in Addis Ababa
911	THE ETHIOPIAN army is failing to halt northern rebels advancing rapidly southwards to the capital and its vital lifeline road .
912	Some observers are predicting the imminent collapse of the military regime which has ruled Ethiopia for 15 years .
913	The rebels , the Tigrayan People 's Liberation Front ( TPLF ) , are threatening to cut off Dese , a key garrison town protecting part of the road linking Addis Ababa with the port of Assab .
914	They have advanced down the Asmara road in the past four weeks and are now reported to be operating south of Dese .
915	They have surrounded a garrison at Bati , to the east , and on 19 September they attacked Mile on the Assab road , closing it for 36 hours .
916	Helicopter gunships ply constant missions from their base at Kombolcha : yesterday I watched MiG-21 fighter-bombers , loaded with bombs and rockets , take off from Dire Dawa and head west .
917	The estimated 40,000 troops in Dese are being joined by the remnants of the defeated Third Army , which is struggling down the road or surrendering to the rebels .
918	One estimate puts government losses in the past four weeks at 20,000 killed , captured or deserted .
919	The government in Addis Ababa will say nothing about the situation , and the war is not reported by the state-run media .
920	However , recent visitors to Dese describe the areas as chaotic , with whole units leaderless and unwilling to fight .
921	Soviet advisers have been withdrawn from Dese and Kombolcha .
922	A Soviet Deputy Defence Minister , General Varrenikov , has been in Addis Ababa for the past week .
923	He is reported to be negotiating the complete withdrawal of the 1,500 Soviet military advisers .
924	The Russians have said they believe in a negotiated settlement to the civil war , but they are continuing to supply arms to President Mengistu , apparently to allow him to negotiate from a position of strength .
925	A large consignment of weapons was unloaded from a Soviet ship at Assab on 21 September .
926	Weapons will not , however , save President Mengistu if no one is willing to use them .
927	The Ethiopian army , the biggest in sub-Saharan Africa , consists largely of press-ganged young peasants or unemployed urban teenagers who have been drafted to the front after a few weeks ' training .
928	At the end of a spectacularly successful year , the TPLF drove the Ethiopian army out of Tigray province in February .
929	Few people thought the Tigrayans could continue their success outside their own province , but on 26 August the TPLF began an advance which drove the government forces out of Korem and Kobo .
930	Three weeks ago , the 102nd Airborne Division , Russian-trained and regarded as a crack unit , was rushed from its base at Asmara to the front line , but it too has been mauled by the rebels , who swept through the mountains flanking the main road , capturing all the towns as far as Woldiya .
931	Meanwhile , in Eritrea , to the north , a de facto ceasefire is holding between the government and the Eritrean People 's Liberation Front ( EPLF ) , which is seeking independence for Eritrea .
932	Peace talks began in Atlanta , Georgia , last month and are due to resume in Nairobi on 18 November .
933	The only government-controlled areas in highland Eritrea are the road between Asmara and Massawa and the garrisons of Keren , Senafe and Adi Kwala .
934	Government troops are digging deep defences at Asmara and there is no doubt that , should the peace talks fail , the EPLF will resume fighting and attack it , or try to cut it off .
935	One option for the TPLF is to strike east , to the Assab-Addis Ababa road .
936	If they succeed in cutting it , they will have achieved checkmate .
937	They could strike west and try to cut off Gonder , another heavily-fortified garrison , or they could try to continue rolling south towards the capital .
938	Addis Ababa is guarded by about 20,000 troops , including President Mengistu 's Praetorian guard , which saved him during the coup attempt in May .
939	No one believes the TPLF can take the capital , but their continuing success could persuade senior army officers that President Mengistu should be replaced by someone who can stop the war and negotiate .
940	‘ The situation is very , very fluid and there is a possibility that the regime will disintegrate , ’ said one Western diplomat .
941	The TPLF has recently transformed itself into the Ethiopian People 's Revolutionary Democratic Movement to give itself more national credibility , but its core remains the Marxist-Leninist League of Tigray , whose political model seems closest to the late Enver Hoxha 's Albania .
942	Much as many Ethiopians fear and loathe the government , they are calling for more political and economic freedom , and would not feel liberated by the TPLF .
943	Nor would they welcome a takeover by the Tigrayans .
944	Most of the people between Dese and the capital are Maharan and Oromo .
945	Nevertheless , there have been several incidents in the capital recently .
946	Bombs were placed in the fuel depot at the airport last month , and a small power station nearby was blown up .
947	Tribalism and liberation meet at Transkei burial
948	From JOHN CARLIN in Bumbane , Transkei
949	WHEN is an independent state not an independent state ?
950	When it 's a homeland .
951	Bumbane , otherwise known as ‘ the Great Place ’ , is the royal burial site of the Tembu tribe here in what South Africa insists on calling the Republic of Transkei , a so-called ‘ homeland ’ for black people upon which Pretoria imposed political independence in 1976 .
952	This helps explain the extraordinary spectacle here yesterday of 5,000 loudly ‘ anti-colonial ’ black people clamouring against independence and for political re-integration with South Africa .
953	The occasion was that black South African speciality , the political funeral .
954	Behind it all was the hand of Nelson Mandela , which may lend the event much significance should it turn out that President FW de Klerk is serious about negotiating with black leaders .
955	Mr Mandela belongs to the royal family of the Tembu tribe .
956	The man buried yesterday was the king of the Tembus , the most powerful of the half dozen tribes who speak the Xhosa language .
957	Since there are six million Xhosas - one million more than the entire white population of South Africa — they are potentially a serious force for Mr de Klerk to reckon with .
958	They count among their number more than 70 per cent of the leaders in the executive of the African National Congress .
959	The ANC does not like this fact to be mentioned , because it purports to eschew tribalism in favour of an all-embracing black nationalism .
960	All the more odd , then , that yesterday 's funeral should have been both a celebration of time-honoured Tembu ritual and the most vocal demonstration in years on what the rest of the world calls South African soil of the strength of the ANC and its far from tribalistic affiliate , the South African Communist Party .
961	The imprisoned Mr Mandela has met in recent months more than a dozen of the chieftains and assorted dignitaries — his Xhosa wife , Winnie , among them - who were on the podium .
962	Yesterday not only were the Xhosas out in force , it seemed that a convention of the entire Mass Democratic Movement - essentially the exiled ANC 's internal representatives — had been called .
963	King Sabata Dalindyebo would have been pleased .
964	He died three years ago .
965	But his body was exhumed last Monday for the ceremonial reburial yesterday .
966	The problem had been that there was no ceremony the first time around .
967	He was buried , under orders from the corrupt and usurping Matanzima brothers who used to run Transkei , in a commoner 's grave .
968	The Matanzimas were forced out after a military coup nearly two years ago .
969	The benign ruler who took over , Major-General Bantu Holomisa , spoke at the graveside .
970	In so doing he also gave his blessing to — what in effect proved to be the case — declaring the Transkei , or at least Bumbane , the first ANC liberated zone , however fleetingly , yesterday afternoon .
971	Draped over the king 's coffin was an ANC flag .
972	He had vehemently opposed Transkei 's bogus independence and , hounded by the Matanzimas , had fled to Zambia , where he joined the ANC .
973	Much plotting went into the organisation of the event .
974	Major-General Holomisa met the president of the ANC in London recently .
975	His brother , who lives in the same house , spoke with Mr Mandela for five hours on 4 August .
976	Mrs Mandela has been shuttling back and forth with messages from her husband 's prison home near Cape Town .
977	The tribal leaders who visited Mr Mandela have also met the top ANC leaders in Zambia .
978	The upshot of it all is that Major-General Holomisa has made Transkei a haven of sorts , a thorn in Pretoria 's side , for the ANC .
979	He will no doubt tread very carefully , but the consequences of his stand could be far-reaching .
980	He said yesterday that he meant to conduct a referendum to test whether Transkei 's three million people wished to retain ‘ independence ’ or not .
981	If the answer is ‘ no ’ , South Africa may have to confront the beginning of the end of the ‘ homelands ’ system .
982	Swapo remains favourite to win the United Nations-supervised elections next month
983	From JOHN CARLIN in Bumbane , Transkei
984	A woman shows her support for the South West Africa People 's Organisation ( Swapo ) at an election rally in Windhoek .
985	Swapo remains the overwhelming favourite to win the United Nations-supervised elections next month , but claims that the organisation has detained and tortured many of its members in Angola and Zambia may deprive it of the two-thirds majority needed to form a government in an independent Namibia without holding another election .
986	The UN is investigating the allegations .
987	Swapo and its main rival , the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance , have accused each other of violent intimidation during the campaign .
988	Out of India : The snow-wreaths melt away in the heat of battle
989	By TONY ALLEN-MILLS
990	BHARATPUR — The monsoon rains are lifting across the Gangetic floodplains , and there is a hint of magic in the air .
991	The winter migrations are beginning , and the skies over northern India are alive with transiting birds .
992	In the next few weeks , as the seasons change in eastern Europe and central Asia , spectacular colonies of painted storks will descend on the lakes and marshes of Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan .
993	They will be followed by flocks of pintail ducks and greylag geese .
994	Tens of thousands of birds , navigating with miraculous precision , arrive each year at their Indian winter homes .
995	But for one tiny group of exquisitely beautiful long-distance travellers , the coming journey may prove their last .
996	Somewhere along the Ob river in central Siberia , slowly building strength for a 3,500-mile flight , wait perhaps 50 Siberian cranes .
997	They are , as far as naturalists are aware , the only surviving members of a rapidly dwindling population of a bird the Siberians call the ‘ snow-wreath ’ .
998	Every autumn , the birds rise from the Ob river swamps to begin a perilous journey south .
999	One small group heads for Iran ; the rest fly through the Soviet Union , across the battlefields of Afghanistan and past the guns of Pakistani poachers to the monsoon-soaked plains of India , where they pass a lazy winter feeding on plants .
1000	But each year fewer arrive .
1001	A century ago , more than 200 Siberian cranes were recorded in the jheels and marshes of Uttar Pradesh .
1002	In 1984 , there were 41 ; two years ago , 31 .
1003	Last year 23 arrived .
1004	Only 13 reached Iran .
1005	The Siberian crane stands four and a half feet tall , its brilliant white plumage offset by a blood-red beak , face and legs .
1006	Jet-black wing quills are visible in flight .
1007	Like most birdwatchers , I have only seen them in pictures -invariably in supremely elegant poses , their long , thin beaks delicately probing the water for weeds .
1008	Unlike most birdwatchers , I am lucky enough to live less than four hours ' drive from their regular winter home — a wildfowl marsh constructed by one of the Maharajahs of Bharatpur .
1009	I was there recently , talking to Dr Lalitha Vijayam about her research on the Siberian crane 's problems and about my chances of seeing one before the Ob river race becomes extinct .
1010	The Maharajahs of Bharatpur were dedicated hunters , famous for their prodigious shoots .
1011	A plaque in the Bharatpur marshes records the November day in 1938 that the then Viceroy of India , Lord Linlithgow , bagged 4,373 wildfowl , 3,044 of them before lunch .
1012	The royal guns did not fall silent at Bharatpur until 1964 .
1013	Soon after , thanks largely to the endeavours of India 's finest ornithologist , Salim Ali , the ex-Maharajah 's swamp was turned into a sanctuary unequalled in Asia .
1014	It is now formally known as the Keoladeo Ghana National Park , and its own guide book charmingly and accurately boasts : ‘ Birds !
1015	Birds ! !
1016	Everywhere Birds ! ! ! ’
1017	Of all the species visible in Bharatpur , none is more romantic or mysterious than the Siberian crane .
1018	There are many suitably marshy habitats in the Ganges basin , yet the bird has invariably stopped at Bharatpur .
1019	There are other beautiful cranes in the park — my favourite is the demoiselle , a slender grey bird with delightful black plumes and ear-tufts .
1020	But no other bird exerts quite the appeal of the annual visitor from the river Ob .
1021	Every year the Indian newspapers chart Siberian crane sightings with the devotion and enthusiasm the British press usually only musters at times of royal births .
1022	Dr Vijayan , a research scientist with the Bombay Natural History Society , is leading a study of the Siberian crane that began in 1980 .
1023	She confesses her team can only guess at the causes of the bird 's decline .
1024	‘ We think they are being shot for meat when they land in Afghanistan , ’ she said .
1025	‘ And we know that some have been poached in Pakistan . ’
1026	The cranes may also have suffered from Bharatpur 's environmental problems .
1027	Scientists are trying to calculate the long-term impact of the catastrophic drought of 1987 .
1028	There have been rows over cattle-grazing and other encroachment .
1029	Fortunately , this year 's monsoon was short but sharp , and improved water management has produced good floods .
1030	Dr Vijayan also reports that after a long struggle to arouse their interest , Pakistani environmentalists are aware of the threat to the bird .
1031	But the war rages on in Afghanistan , and crane protection is understandably a low priority in Kabul .
1032	The war , and the region 's complex geopolitical concerns , are also preventing naturalists from undertaking the most effective means of monitoring the Siberian crane - ringing the flock with miniature transmitters that could be tracked from space .
1033	The prospect of Moscow , Kabul , Islamabad and New Delhi all agreeing on a joint satellite monitoring venture is not great .
1034	The scientists can only wait and hope .
1035	Which is what I shall be doing for the next three months .
1036	Given the awesome sum of human misery in this part of the world , I suppose I should n't get too worked up about the fate of a flock of birds — particularly as the much larger eastern race of the Siberian crane , which migrates from north-eastern Yakutia to the lower reaches of the Yangtse river in China , is apparently surviving well .
1037	But if the snow-wreaths of the Ob river do n't reach Bharatpur this year , I shall feel inescapably sad .
1038	Russians send Kabul 2,000 supply trucks
1039	From AHMED RASHID in Kabul
1040	THE SOVIET UNION is supplying the Afghan government with another 2,000 trucks to step up the supply of food , fuel and ammunition to Kabul 's 1.5 million people before the winter snows affect the roads .
1041	The unconditional Soviet support to the Kabul regime is on such a scale that the US and Pakistan can not hope to match it .
1042	Every few minutes a truck thunders down the strategic Salang Highway on its way from Hiratan on the Soviet border to Kabul .
1043	Convoys half a mile long are watched over by scattered Afghan army outposts on the hills by the road .
1044	Drivers report no guerrilla attacks , even though security north of the Salang Tunnel has been largely handed over to local militia units and the army withdrawn .
1045	After setting up a bitumen plant and providing earth-moving machinery , the Soviets helped cut a new road east of the old Salang Tunnel .
1046	The highway , which links up with the old road south of Charikar , avoids mujahedin territory and and passes through a region where the Kabul regime has concluded deals with local guerrilla commanders .
1047	‘ We are receiving 300 trucks of supplies a day from the Soviet Union , ’ said the deputy prime minister , General Mohammed Hakim .
1048	A US-trained officer , 48-year-old General Hakim is the most experienced convoy trouble-shooter in the regime , having organised the relief convoy to the besieged city of Khost two years ago and saved Kabul from near starvation last year .
1049	‘ The government 's main preoccupation is getting supplies to the cities before winter , ’ he said .
1050	This year , government-held countryside produced only 150,000 tonnes of wheat , or 10 per cent of Afghanistan 's total consumption , due to a bad harvest and the war .
1051	Of the 90,000 tonnes of wheat needed in Kabul to survive the winter , 37,000 tonnes have already been stockpiled , General Hakim said .
1052	Afghan and diplomatic sources said that the Soviets would provide 2,000 more trucks and fuel tankers , but General Hakim admitted that the real problem will be fuel , which is already in short supply in Kabul .
1053	Diesel prices on the black markeat are ten times higher than the official price .
1054	Even for some government cars , diesel is only available on the black market .
1055	For the past few weeks President Najibullah has been meeting militia commanders from around the country offering them more weapons and money to maintain their loyalty and keep the roads open .
1056	Since all private truck owners are now allowed to bring food from Hiratan and sell it in Kabul , some militia commanders , most of them former mujahedin , are buying trucks and becoming traders .
1057	The Soviet relief effort is also employing aircraft .
1058	Up to 40 flights a day bring in weapons and ammunition , including Frog 7s , a short range surface-to-surface missile that is less expensive than the Scud missiles already provided .
1059	The flights that circle Kabul every quarter of an hour are a morale booster for the hard-pressed population .
1060	‘ The Soviet Union is giving us oxygen — bread and weapons to defend ourselves , ’ said Suleman Laeq , the minister for tribes and nationalities .
1061	Soviet aid to Kabul is estimated at between $250m ( £154 ) and $300m a month .
1062	The US and Saudi Arabia will have funnelled some $700m to the Pakistan-based mujahedin by the end of this year .
1063	Soviet aid has helped in maintaining the population 's morale and the regime 's credibility and unity , while US aid to the to the mujahedin has done little to increase their unity , morale or fighting ability .
1064	WASHINGTON — The US should explore the possibility of an agreement with the Soviet Union to cut off military supplies to Afghanistan , a leading senator said in a report published yesterday , Reuter reports .
1065	Claiborne Pell , chairman of the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee , also called for a neutral government in Kabul to hold elections or seek a traditional Afghan consultative assembly .
1066	Mr Pell issued the report after a trip to Pakistan in August and talks with Pakistani leaders and leaders of the US-Pakistan-backed provisional government .
1067	Army on guard as China fetes its Revolution
1068	From ANDREW HIGGINS in Peking
1069	CHINA 'S leaders celebrated the 40th anniversary of Communist rule yesterday , protected from their people by the biggest security operation undertaken in the capital since the People 's Liberation Army stormed into Peking four months ago .
1070	Standing exactly where Mao Tse-tung proclaimed the People 's Republic of China on 1 October 1949 , paramount leader Deng Xiaoping joined other party leaders atop the Gate of Heavenly Peace to preside over a night of fireworks and martial music in Tiananmen Square .
1071	Fearful of protests or violence by citizens outraged by the army 's brutal assault on Tiananmen on 4 June , armed troops cordoned off a large area of central Peking , admitting only hand-picked spectators into the square .
1072	Among the guests were thousands of plain-clothes police and out-of-uniform soldiers , some of whom arrived in military trucks , dressed as clowns .
1073	Authorities have themselves acknowledged fears that ‘ counter-revolutionaries ’ , still at large despite a nationwide crackdown on dissent , might try to sabotage the anniversary .
1074	Throughout the day , thousands of troops patrolled central Peking , while police set up road-blocks to check cars in the city 's north-west university district of Haidian , the birthplace of China 's seven-week-long pro-democracy movement .
1075	Many students , still bitterly hostile to the government despite a barrage of propaganda and weeks of political study classes , refused to take part in the celebrations , spending the day inside their dormitories .
1076	On instructions from authorities , Peking University , the focus of the student rebellion , sent a dance troupe , one of scores of similar groups dragooned into the celebrations .
1077	Although sullen opposition and private anger still shadows the Communist Party , no disturbances were reported during yesterday 's events .
1078	Hundreds of thousands of people poured into the streets to watch the firework display - a fact which , Mr Deng boasted , proves that ‘ China 's social order has returned to normal ’ .
1079	He made the comment in remarks to a visiting official from North Korea , one of only a handful of foreign countries to send special delegations for national day .
1080	Others included East Germany , Cuba and the Soviet Union — a list that reflects China 's sudden dependence on the Communist bloc for its friends .
1081	Most Western ambassadors boycotted the firework display but did attend a reception on Saturday hosted by the Prime Minister , Li Peng .
1082	Many Western businessmen attended both .
1083	Strident editorials in the official press condemned foreign interference and predicted the worldwide triumph of socialism .
1084	The Peking Daily accused the West of trying to subjugate China for 40 years and of now waging ‘ psychological warfare and dreaming of victory without war ’ .
1085	The unusually confrontational rhetoric suggests that Mao was perhaps less than correct when , 40 years ago yesterday , he announced to Tiananmen : ‘ The Chinese people have stood up … we have friends all over the world . ’
1086	HONG KONG — More than 3,000 people marked the 40th anniversary of Communist rule in China yesterday by rallying to protest against the suppression of the pro-democracy movement in Peking , AP reports .
1087	Szeto Wah , a Hong Kong legislator , told the crowd : ‘ A republic ruled by the people has not yet been realised . ’
1088	The three-hour rally was organised by the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the Patriotic Democratic Movement of China .
1089	Cambodia puts in more troops
1090	From ANDREW HIGGINS in Peking
1091	ARANYAPRATHET , Thailand ( UPI , AP ) — Heavy fighting continued in western Cambodia yesterday as the Vietnamese-backed government brought in reinforcements to face a drive by non-communist resistance forces , resistance officials and military sources said .
1092	‘ We might have to stop our advances if there are a lot of reinforcements , ’ said a senior official of the Khmer People 's National Liberation Front ( KPNLF ) , Ieng Mouli .
1093	Military reports showed the KPNLF offensive launched on Saturday had made quick initial progress , he said , and troops had captured at least 10 government positions and large quantities of weapons .
1094	The acting commander-in-chief of the KPNLF , Dien Del , said the fighting had continued overnight and had been ‘ more than 70 per cent successful ’ .
1095	He expected his troops would take two more towns and said his fighters now controlled the whole of Highway 69 , along the Thai frontier , north of Sisophon .
1096	Western sources at the Thai-Cambodian border confirmed the KPNLF had scored some major gains , and military sources there said the fighting was continuing .
1097	The low rumble of artillery fire could be heard from this nearby Thai border town .
1098	One source attributed the quick victories of the initial push to agreement by the ill-trained Heng Samrin forces to accept payments to abandon their positions before the assaults .
1099	Military sources said the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge guerrilla group had joined the KPNLF in a pincer attack on Sisophon .
1100	Earlier , Abdul Gaffar Peang-meth , the assistant to the KPNLF commander-in-chief , Ak Sutsakorn , had denied any knowledge of co-ordination with the Khmer Rouge .
1101	Prisoner of Conscience : Burmese prisoners face death : Moe Kyaw Thu , Zwa Gyi and Nyi Nyi U
1102	By CAROLINE MOOREHEAD
1103	A BOY of 17 and two men in their twenties face execution in Burma for planting a bomb , but others involved in the crime say they took no part in it .
1104	Human rights organisations maintain that the men have been wrongly convicted and are being victimised for being members of the leading opposition political party .
1105	were arrested on 17 July in connection with a parcel bomb which exploded in the Syriam state oil refinery 10 days earlier and killed two people .
1106	Violent incidents of this kind have become commonplace in a country where all human rights are being eroded .
1107	Nothing was known of the fate of the three men , all of them active on behalf of the National League for Democracy , until 27 July , when the official radio announced that they had been condemned to death .
1108	Their trial had been completed in a single morning session before a military tribunal inside Insein Prison , an overcrowded place notorious for torture .
1109	The trial was conducted under martial-law provisions proclaimed only on the day of their arrest , and was the first to be held under these procedures .
1110	Lawyers said the prosecution was allowed to present evidence , but that there was no mention of any defence evidence .
1111	Martial law orders empower military tribunals to ‘ waive unnecessary witnesses ’ and to impose death sentences ‘ regardless of the provisions under existing laws ’ .
1112	It emerged that not only was there no reliable evidence of guilt , but , on the contrary , there was considerable proof of innocence .
1113	The Karen National Union , which admits to violent opposition to the military government , denies the three men were in any way involved .
1114	A fourth man , said to have provided the bomb , has added that they had nothing to do with it .
1115	No appeal is allowed under Burma 's new martial law orders and Amnesty International fears that Moe Kyaw Thu , Zaw Gyi and Nyi Nyi U may be executed any day .
1116	Aquino prepares for clash over Marcos body
1117	From KEVIN HAMLIN in Manila
1118	PRESIDENT Corazon Aquino of the Philippines is bracing herself for a legal battle over her decision not to allow the remains of the former president , Ferdinand Marcos , to be returned home from Hawaii for burial .
1119	At the behest of Marcos ' family , Vice-president Salvador Laurel , Mrs Aquino 's estranged deputy and now head of an opposition party , and a group of ‘ loyalists ’ will today attempt to reverse an earlier Supreme Court ruling to uphold Mrs Aquino 's decision to prohibit Marcos ' return .
1120	But at the weekend , although Mrs Aquino said she would respect any Supreme Court decision , she said she had received ‘ highly sensitive ’ information that strengthened her resolve .
1121	She said yesterday that Marcos 's remains may be brought to the Philippines when emotions have subsided .
1122	Mrs Aquino cited the case of Napoleon , who died in exile in 1821 and remains made ‘ a very triumphant return ’ to France in 1840 when ‘ things had settled down ’ .
1123	Marcos ruled the Philippines for 20 years before Mrs Aquino was swept to office on a wave of ‘ people power ’ in 1986 .
1124	The Aquino government accuses him of having stolen up to US$10bn ( £6.1bn ) from the country during his reign .
1125	He died in Honolulu on Thursday .
1126	Calling Mrs Aquino 's decision an infringement of universal human rights , Mr Laurel said : ‘ The ban is contrary to the constitution and is therefore illegal . ’
1127	But citing ‘ national welfare ’ , the Supreme Court earlier voted eight to seven to uphold the ban imposed by Mrs Aquino .
1128	Mr Laurel said : ‘ Now that he is dead , that makes a lot of difference . ’
1129	Details of the ‘ highly sensitive ’ information have not been made public , but it is understood to have originated from intelligence and diplomatic sources and probably relates to plans by Marcos loyalists to capitalise on his return to the country .
1130	At meeting on Saturday Mrs Aquino gave aides details of this information .
1131	The military is on alert , with half of its troops confined to barracks as a precaution against disturbances .
1132	There has , however , so far been little popular reaction in the country to the death of Marcos .
1133	Several hundred people have been attending a nightly candle-lit vigil , and there has been one other small protest .
1134	Mubarak peace proposal exposes Israeli tensions
1135	From CHARLES RICHARDS in Jerusalem
1136	THE ISRAELI cabinet is being called this week to debate for the first time proposals made by Egypt for advancing the search for a settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
1137	The cabinet session — billed , like many before , as ‘ crucial ’ — is to discuss the 10 points submitted by President Mubarak to clarify Israel 's initiative for elections in the occupied territories .
1138	They have directed a powerful light on the ambiguities of the initiative .
1139	This has not only exposed the underlying differences between Likud and Labour which the initiative papered over .
1140	They have also highlighted old rifts and stimulated new ones within the parties themselves .
1141	Mr Mubarak 's proposals were first formally presented to Israel on 16 September .
1142	The Israeli Prime Minister , Yitzak Shamir , procrastinated and postponed discussion of the points at the cabinet , the inner cabinet , or the top decision-making body known as the ‘ forum of four ’ senior ministers , in the hope that the problem would go away .
1143	In the meantime , ministers conducted individual diplomatic initiatives on the basis of Egyptian ideas not yet discussed by the government .
1144	The Defence Minister , Yitzhak Rabin , met Mr Mubarak in Cairo , and in the US , Mr Arens and Mr Peres separately met President Mubarak and the US Secretary of State , James Baker .
1145	The two issues at the heart of the disagreement are those which have killed at birth any attempt in the past dozen years to address the Palestinian question : Who speaks for the Palestinians and what are the limits of the Palestinian problem ?
1146	The first centres on the composition of a Palestinian delegation that would hold talks with Israel in Cairo .
1147	Mr Rabin has suggested including Palestinians deported by the Israelis .
1148	This would satisfy demands by the Palestine Liberation Organisation for delegates from outside to underline the principle that the Palestinian issue deals with a whole people .
1149	At the same time , Israel could maintain they were still legally residents of the occupied territories .
1150	But Mr Shamir has given no sign of softening his opposition to any contact with the PLO , or with Palestinians from outside , including those deported for activities hostile to Israel .
1151	And the depth of his ideological commitment to maintaining Israel 's hold over the West Bank rules out any acceptance of the principle that negotiations should eventually lead to an exchange of land for peace .
1152	Israeli troops killed four Palestinians yesterday and a fifth was beaten to death by fellow Arabs for alleged collaboration with Israel , Reuter reports .
1153	Lebanese MPs scrape rust off government machinery
1154	From ROBERT FISK in Taif , Saudi Arabia
1155	IT IS difficult to know who is the more isolated : the 62 members of the Lebanese Parliament or the 73 members of the Lebanese press corps .
1156	Lebanon 's MPs — 31 of them Muslims , 31 of them Christians — have left the militia leaders behind in Beirut to keep the peace .
1157	The MPs are here to scrape the rust off the derelict machinery of government , to recreate the corroded institution that will have to elect a president and produce a government which can impose its rule on Lebanon — and on the militia leaders .
1158	Hence the isolation .
1159	Closeted in the conference palace at Taif — itself built by a Lebanese-born millionaire — the MPs found themselves unable to exercise their normal function of playing to the gallery .
1160	Lebanese parliamentary sessions have to be open to the public .
1161	They also , by law , have to be held in Beirut .
1162	So this was therefore called ‘ an informal meeting of Lebanese parliamentarians ’ — which effectively closed the doors of their marble debating chamber to the press .
1163	In equal isolation at the Intercontinental Hotel , 16 miles away , Lebanese journalists found themselves restricted to the parliament 's two opening statements and a diet of gentle assurances from Prince Saud al-Feisel , the Saudi Foreign Minister , that optimism was the order of the day , but while he had heard of some disputes in the parliamentary chamber , he had every reason to believe the Lebanese would accept the Arab League peace plan .
1164	Christian MPs close to General Michel Aoun wanted to talk first about a Syrian withdrawal , in according with the general 's instructions .
1165	And it is perfectly clear that the old representatives of Lebanese democracy are under considerable pressure to talk about reform and not withdrawal .
1166	Saeb Salam made this perfectly evident .
1167	Mr Salam , 84 , a Sunni Muslim , is the most impressive of Lebanon 's dying breed of elder statesmen , but his words could have been those of a much younger man .
1168	‘ It is not appropriate to insist upon an immediate Syrian withdrawal , ’ he said .
1169	‘ We must admit that a Syrian withdrawal could provoke many dangers for which no one would want to take responsibility .
1170	This is true , regardless of the opinion that some people have of Syria , and of their unhappiness at Syria 's presence in Lebanon .
1171	Among the dangers that this could bring about would be the emergence of small concessional states governed by the militias . ’
1172	All this was shorthand for a simple warning : that if the Syrians pull out of west Beirut , the militias would go to war again in its streets , and there would be nothing the Christians could do about it .
1173	Coach death
1174	From ROBERT FISK in Taif , Saudi Arabia
1175	( First Edition ) LYONS ( AFP ) — A British girl , Yvonne Brigden , 16 , was killed and two other Britons were injured when their coach collided with two lorries in southern France on Saturday .
1176	Boris is back
1177	From ROBERT FISK in Taif , Saudi Arabia
1178	MOSCOW ( Reuter ) — Thousands of Soviet television viewers yesterday heard Boris Yeltsin , the Communist Party rebel , warn of a ‘ revolution from below ’ if radical economic changes did not happen within a year .
1179	His remarks , during his recent US tour , were shown only days after Pravda reprinted — and then apologised for — an Italian newspaper article accusing him of drunkenness and high-living during the trip .
1180	Afghan rockets
1181	By AHMED RASHID
1182	KABUL — Fifteen mujahedin rockets slammed into residential areas of Kabul over the weekend , killing 10 people and wounding 27 , writes Ahmed Rashid .
1183	Heavy fighting was also reported around the city of Khost .
1184	The government said three soldiers were killed in a nearby village , and 41 guerrillas died in a retaliatory attack .
1185	Party time
1186	By AHMED RASHID
1187	BULAWAYO , ZIMBABWE ( Reuter ) — Joshua Nkomo , 72 , threw a huge birthday and 40th wedding anniversary party at the weekend and President Robert Mugabe was there to seal the unity between the former rivals .
1188	During the two-day festivities at Barbourfields stadium , politicians and business leaders , city workers and Matabeleland villagers , ate and mingled .
1189	Iran quake
1190	By AHMED RASHID
1191	TEHRAN ( AFP ) — At least 300 homes were destroyed in an earthquake which shook the south-western Iranian town of Sisakht on Mount Dena early yesterday , the news agency IRNA reported .
1192	Most of the damage was caused by landslides .
1193	Japan poll
1194	By AHMED RASHID
1195	TOKYO ( Reuter , AFP , AP ) — Japan 's Prime Minister , Toshiki Kaifu , scored an important victory in a parliamentary by-election in Ibaraki prefecture , north of Tokyo , yesterday .
1196	Thus , Mr Kaifu is likely to be re-elected president of his Liberal Democratic Party next month , and retain the post of prime minister .
1197	Turnaround
1198	By AHMED RASHID
1199	ISLAMABAD ( Reuter , AP ) — The Queen has sent a message to Pakistan , welcoming its formal return to the Commonwealth .
1200	Nicholas Barrington has ceased to be Ambassador , and is now High Commissioner .
1201	When the plaque on the home of the ‘ British Ambassador ’ was removed , the words ‘ Residence of the British High Commissioner ’ were found on the back , a relic from 1972 when Pakistan left the Commonwealth in protest at its recognition of Bangladesh .
1202	Libyan medal
1203	By AHMED RASHID
1204	NICOSIA ( Reuter ) — Libya has awarded Charles De Gaulle the medal of the Great al-Fateh Revolution for campaigning to free France from ‘ American imperialist domination ’ .
1205	Outback protests
1206	By AHMED RASHID
1207	SYDNEY ( Reuter ) — Police arrested more than 200 anti-nuclear protesters at a military base in the south Australian outback yesterday , bringing the total detained to nearly 500 in three days of protests .
1208	Chemical Mace was used against the demonstrators at the US-Australian communications installation at Nurrungar , and the police were backed up by 50 unarmed soldiers .
1209	Talks with ANC held in Britain
1210	By JOHN BULLOCH
1211	LONDON — A group of prominent white South Africans , including Wimpie de Klerk , brother of President FW de Klerk , began a series of meetings with the banned African National Congress in Britain yesterday , writes John Bulloch .
1212	The ANC team was led by Thabo Mbeki , the organisation 's chief of information and the man regarded as a likely successor to Oliver Tambo .
1213	Reports in South Africa said a number of members of the Broederbond , the secret Afrikaner pressure group , were included in the talks , as well as individuals known to be close to Gerrit Viljoen , the Constitutional Planning Minister .
1214	It is his task to try to involve black leaders in negotiations on constitutional reform .
1215	Kohl party expected to lose again
1216	By JOHN BULLOCH
1217	BONN ( Reuter ) — Chancellor Helmut Kohl 's Christian Democrats suffered their fourth successive election setback this year in voting yesterday in North Rhine-Westphalia , West Germany 's most populous state .
1218	Computerised projections showed the party 's share of the vote for regional and city councils had fallen to 37.9 per cent from 42.2 per cent in 1984 .
1219	The Social Democrats increased their share slightly to 43.1 per cent from 42.5 .
1220	The World This Week
1221	By FIONA LENEY
1222	THERE WILL be little cause for celebration when East Germany marks the 40th anniversary of its founding on Saturday .
1223	The government is planning lavish festivities to entertain all the friends that it claims to have .
1224	But the jamboree could well turn into one of those parties where half the guests fail to turn up , and everyone else tries terribly hard to pretend that they are having a marvellous time .
1225	Unsurprisingly , among the ‘ friends ’ attending will be the Romanian President , Nicolae Ceausescu , and the Czechoslovak leader , Milos Jakes .
1226	The Chinese will also be represented , by their Vice-Prime Minister , Yao Yilin .
1227	More interesting will be the presence of Mikhail Gorbachev , whose reforms are viewed with disapproval and alarm in East Berlin .
1228	Also attending will be Poland 's President , Wojciech Jaruzelski , considered by East Germany as one of Communism 's sounder sons who has gone lamentably astray in handing power over to non-Communists .
1229	A different sort of jamboree , arguably of greater use to mankind , kicks off in Oslo on Thursday , when the Nobel Peace Prize is announced .
1230	One of the candidates this year is the entire population of Peking , apparently in keeping with the tradition of off-beat nominees for the prize .
1231	The 1989 awards are each worth £300,000 , 20 per cent more than last year , due to particularly good returns on investments made by the Nobel Foundation .
1232	Hungary 's Communist Party is expected to formalise radical political and economic changes at its special congress on Friday .
1233	The congress has been brought forward by a year , in what is being interpreted as a victory for the leader of the reformist wing of the party , Imre Pozsgay .
1234	He is reportedly hoping to oust Karoly Grosz as General Secretary .
1235	The party may well face further depletion with the expected defection of some members to set up yet another social democratic opposition party .
1236	Mr Grosz , 59 , has been overtaken , some would say swamped , by the wave of reforms he unleashed after displacing Janos Kadar as Hungarian leader in May 1987 .
1237	Now he finds himself in the same position as his predecessor — a relative conservative whose time is past .
1238	The Pope , a conservative whose grip on the reins of power has never been firmer , is setting off on a tour of the Far East on Friday .
1239	He will start in Seoul , where he is to officiate at the 44th International Eucharistic Congress .
1240	He will also celebrate mass for about one million Korean faithful and 20,000 clergy members and laymen from 120 foreign countries in a ceremony on Sunday .
1241	The Pope is expected to meet President Roh Tae Woo .
1242	A more controversial moment may come when he visits East Timor , since the Vatican refuses to recognise the annexation of the island by Indonesia .
1243	The Soviet Defence Minister , Dmitri Yazov , visits the Pentagon today for a meeting with the US Defence Secretary , Dick Cheney .
1244	His visit is the first by a Soviet defence minister to the US .
1245	He is due to get a comprehensive view of the country this week , from watching marines train in California and visiting the 82nd Airborne Division in North Carolina , to a touch of military tourism on the site of the Civil War battlefield at Gettysburg .
1246	EC foreign ministers , meeting today , have already drawn up their battle-lines over the much-vexed topic of safeguarding European culture on television .
1247	They will be debating a European Commission directive which only calls on EC television stations to screen a majority of European programmes , where possible .
1248	The British , perhaps sensitive to intense American lobbying over the issue , want to adopt the directive as it stands .
1249	The French want a mandatory minimum level imposed of 60 per cent of programmes made in Europe .
1250	If no accord is reached by Friday , the directive will die anyway , under a time limit rule .
1251	Botswana goes to the polls on Saturday , when seven parties will contest 34 seats in the country 's single chamber .
1252	President Quett Masire is expected to be nominated again as the presidential candidate of the Botswana Democratic Party , which has ruled since independence in 1966 .
1253	Finally , a special celebration takes place on Friday , when the famous Parisian cabaret , The Moulin Rouge , celebrates its 100th birthday .
1254	Genscher cheered as 4,000 refugees leave for the West
1255	From EDWARD LUCAS in Prague
1256	EARLY yesterday morning , the increasingly squalid West German embassy in Prague finally disgorged its cargo of more than 4,000 dirty , dazed and exhausted East German emigrants .
1257	Conditions and hopes at the embassy had been declining rapidly , given the apparent reluctance of Czechoslovakia to contemplate even a temporary humanitarian solution to ease the overcrowding .
1258	Early on Saturday evening , however , while Prague seemed sunk in its customary weekend torpor , West Germany 's veteran foreign minister , Hans-Dietrich Genscher , arrived unannounced , hotfoot from the United Nations .
1259	From a balcony overlooking the embassy grounds , and to wild cheering from the thousands of would-be emigrants in the ‘ tent village ’ below , he announced all those staying in the embassy would be allowed to leave immediately for the West .
1260	The deal Mr Genscher struck with his East German counterpart , Oskar Fischer , remains as unexplained as it was unexpected .
1261	Many of the East Germans assumed West Germany had again dug into its pocket to ‘ buy out ’ East Germans seeking to come to the West .
1262	Better informed sources suggested Soviet pressure on East Germany was responsible for the climbdown .
1263	Others pointed to the inevitable and embarrassing shadow the embassy occupation would have cast over next weekend 's celebrations of the 40th anniversary of the founding of East Germany .
1264	But the questions were forgotten in a scramble to cram grubby possessions into muddy rucksacks and carrier bags , and then stream out of the embassy to queue for buses in the long , cobbled , dimly-lit street .
1265	For some , it was the first step outside the embassy grounds for three months .
1266	An end-of-term atmosphere , tempered by extreme exhaustion , prevailed .
1267	People embraced and wept , promising to stay in touch , only to realise in some cases that they had no addresses to exchange .
1268	Some sang ‘ Auld Lang Syne ’ , and ‘ Tannenbaum ’ .
1269	West German tourists and Czechoslovaks gathered on street corners to cheer and wave as seven chartered Czechoslovak buses began many hours of ferrying the East Germans to the distant suburban rail terminus where trains arrived through the night to take them to West Germany .
1270	Women with children were in the first buses .
1271	Even when , after several hours , the majority of emigrants had set off , a group of young men wearing track suits remained in darkness at the back of the embassy , helping the most recent arrivals over the railings .
1272	At Liben railway station in the northern outskirts of Prague , East Germans queued cheerfully in drizzle for more than an hour to enter the departure hall .
1273	Most were content to contemplate their deliverance , but some were more boisterous .
1274	Young men carrying home-made West German emblems chanted ‘ Long Live Germany , Long Live Genscher ’ .
1275	Few appeared perturbed at beginning a new life in such unusual circumstances .
1276	Many of the emigrants are skilled workers confident of their job prospects .
1277	By far the greatest worries were those of divided families .
1278	A small group was reported to have stayed in the embassy in the hope of avoiding separation from friends or family en route from East Germany .
1279	Yesterday morning the police , conspicuous but inactive in past weeks , blocked East German latecomers from access to the embassy garden .
1280	The embassy grounds , emptied of their temporary visitors , were unrecognisably battered .
1281	The once crowded white and khaki tents sagged emptily over mud .
1282	A sour smell of overcrowded humanity hung in the air .
1283	The embassy gardener is said to be planning ‘ to start again' .
1284	Prayers and protest over Chernobyl
1285	From EDWARD LUCAS in Prague
1286	MINSK ( Reuter ) — A thousand people packed the main Catholic church here yesterday to pay tribute to victims of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster , a day after an unprecedented protest march through the city .
1287	Kalvariskii Church overflowed with people , many wearing armbands with radioactivity symbols .
1288	They sang hymns and said a prayer for the 31 people who died and those who suffered from radiation in the April 1986 accident .
1289	‘ We must not forget the sufferings that occurred , ’ the priest , Yan Adamovich , told the congregation in Polish and Byelorussian .
1290	Hundreds of people stood outside unable to get in .
1291	Similar services were scheduled for later in the day in the Byelorussian capital 's two Orthodox churches .
1292	On Saturday , more than 15,000 demonstrators ignored an official ban and rain to march through Minsk demanding local authorities do more to clean up the Chernobyl accident .
1293	For four hours they chanted ‘ Down with ( Yefrem ) Sokolov ’ — the republic 's party chief — and cheered calls for the prosecution of those running the republic 's government at the time of the disaster .
1294	Around 100,000 people were evacuated from the Ukraine and Byelorussia immediately after the disaster , but Byelorussian activists say this was not nearly enough .
1295	Latecomers who continue to hope
1296	From ANNE APPLEBAUM in Warsaw
1297	DOZENS more East German refugees arrived outside the West German embassy yesterday seeking asylum and passage to the West , including some who missed by only a few minutes a train that took more than 800 of their compatriots to West Germany .
1298	Many of the new arrivals , who waited in the street outside the embassy , said they were convinced there would be another train for them .
1299	The one they missed pulled out from Warsaw 's East Station at 2.50am yesterday carrying 809 cheering East Germans bound for the Rhine region of West Germany .
1300	Once upon a time another German government let Lenin cross another Germany in a sealed train on his way to Russia .
1301	More than 80 years later , Lenin 's heirs are allowing refugees from their Communist regime escape in the opposite direction , in an East German-made train travelling across East German territory .
1302	Among those leaving was Cornelia , 22 , a young East Berliner destined , she said , for West Berlin via a very circuitous route .
1303	‘ I still do n't know if my family know where I am or if they will suffer from my decision .
1304	But I saw no other way out : I did n't know if I would ever have a chance again . ’
1305	Some of the refugees had been living in Polish exile for as long as seven weeks , while others arrived only a few hours before West German diplomats announced they could leave .
1306	Only two failed to go : a new mother and her child , who was born in a Polish hospital four days ago .
1307	The East German government 's decision to let the refugees leave across their own country came as a surprise to many , including some West German diplomats .
1308	Some of the refugees originally refused to touch East German territory again , but were reassured when two of the West German diplomats said they would accompany the train , to ensure that the rules were followed .
1309	During the journey , East German officials will enter the train , and collect all East German passports .
1310	West Germans will then issue new ones .
1311	Legally , the refugees have been expelled from East Germany , meaning that under current rules they can not return .
1312	According to unofficial reports , the arrangement was designed by the West German Foreign Minister , Hans Dietrich Genscher , the new Polish foreign minister , Krzystof Skubiszewski , and the Soviet Foreign Minister , Eduard Shevardnadze , who met recently at the United Nations in New York .
1313	Communists allow burial of Montenegro 's last king
1314	From MARCUS TANNER in Cetinje , Yugoslavia
1315	THE PEOPLE of Montenegro yesterday welcomed home the remains of Nicholas I , their first and last king , after 70 years ' exile in Italy , in belated fulfilment of his last will and testament .
1316	Thousands of Montenegrins , many in national costume , waited at the quayside in Bar for the Italian warship that would bring him home .
1317	Then they formed a slow procession behind the coffin into the mountains to the old royal capital of Cetinje for his reburial in the monastery there .
1318	What was surely the last ever Montenegrin ‘ royal event ’ was masterminded by the republic 's new Communist leadership , which has abruptly stopped describing Nicholas as a class enemy , to ride the same wave of popular patriotism and royal fervour which swept Serbia in the recent celebrations of the 600th anniversary of the battle of Kosovo .
1319	The latest biography now calls him ‘ an outstanding statesman , warrior and man of letters ’ .
1320	‘ If I die abroad in exile , let my body rest in a temporary grave until my mortal remains be transferred to our dear homeland , ’ said the Montenegrin President , Branko Kostic , reading the royal will and testament to the crowds in Cetinje Square , who carried flags and portraits of Nicholas and his queen , Milena .
1321	‘ Today the people of Montenegro fulfill the wish of their first and last king guided by innate love and respect for their history , ’ he went on .
1322	‘ Our tourist organisations are counting on big profits , ’ said Srdan Darmanovic , a member of the Montenegrin Central Committee .
1323	‘ This will be good for the Montenegrin economy too . ’
1324	Montenegro 's young and go-ahead leadership , which came to power this year amid furious popular dissatisfaction with the ‘ old men in grey suits ’ , sponsored the gathering of Nicholas 's surviving relatives — the first ‘ royal reunion ’ organised by a Communist government .
1325	‘ A letter dropped through the post from the President of the Socialist Republic of Montenegro , inviting me to the funeral , ’ said John Kennedy , a Conservative Party member who lives in Barking and is a distant relative of Nicholas .
1326	Montenegro 's sudden rehabilitation of Nicholas 's memory is a popular move .
1327	‘ He liberated us from the Turks and fought for our independence , ’ said a small boy who waited at the quayside amid a jostling crowd of former monarchs , visiting Serbian bishops and television crews .
1328	Marko Radoman , 103 , and a veteran of both Balkan wars , was given a place at the front as one of the few with personal memories of Nicholas 's reign .
1329	For a man whom Rebecca West , a contemporary Balkan observer , called ‘ repulsive ’ and ‘ treacherous ’ for deserting his Serbian son-in-law , King Alexander , in the First World War , it is a sepia-tinted view of history .
1330	Nicholas was known as ‘ the uncle of Europe ’ for his success in marrying his beautiful but penniless daughters into the grander royal houses of Russia , Serbia and Italy .
1331	This furthered his long-term ambition to rule a large ‘ south Slav ’ kingdom when the Ottoman Empire finally collapsed .
1332	One daughter , a grand duchess of Russia , even gained a footnote in history by introducing an unknown monk , Rasputin , to the Russian Tsarina Alexandra .
1333	In his minute , inaccessible capital , which today has only 15,000 inhabitants , Nicholas erected a miniature European court and an exquisitely furnished Victorian palace .
1334	He even persuaded 12 European powers to turn cottages into full embassies .
1335	It was a fair achievement in a town which an earlier observer described as ‘ 44 hovels ’ .
1336	But Nicholas 's grand design collapsed in 1918 when his Serbian son-in-law , Alexander , deposed him and incorporated Montenegro into Yugoslavia .
1337	For church and state it 's divorce — Italian style
1338	From MICHAEL SHERIDAN in Rome
1339	EVEN THOSE students of Italian Catholic politics enchanted by Byzantine matters are nostalgic this autumn for the days when schism was a simple affair .
1340	Important changes are afoot within the network of personal relationships which have cemented state and church power in Italy since the war .
1341	The church hierarchy , which daily seems to see less that is Christian in the Christian Democrat party , is divorcing itself from its traditional allies .
1342	Ironically , it is the proconsuls of that great exemplar of Vatican influence , Giulio Andreotti , Prime Minister for the sixth time , who are exciting church disapproval .
1343	His faction has triumphed over the reformist elements of Christian Democracy , headed by the ousted leader and premier , Ciriaco De Mita .
1344	In the sweetness of victory , Mr Andreotti 's Roman cohorts have forgotten that they are mortal and , in the eyes of many churchmen , their greed and arrogance now risk bringing Catholic politics into disrepute .
1345	The Pope 's Vicar of Rome , Cardinal Ugo Poletti , has taken to scolding the Christian Democrats for their divisions which may bring victory for the secular parties and the Communists in city elections on 29 October .
1346	A public rift in Catholic politics surfaced last week when the Communion and Liberation movement severed its ties with a powerful weekly magazine , Il Sabato , run by Andreotti supporters .
1347	The magazine exploited popular Catholic themes , such as anti-abortion campaigning and family values to channel middle-class resentment into a political movement .
1348	The movement promoted single-issue politics but invariably delivered its machine vote to the Christian Democrats .
1349	The Pope 's initial enthusiasm for its stridency has waned , as has his toleration for the way Rome is governed beyond the Vatican walls .
1350	‘ A place with corners that resemble the Third World ’ was his verdict this year on the city 's mixture of new private affluence and public squalor , its Mafia-like interest groups and its grotesque inefficiencies .
1351	His newspaper , L'Osservatore Romano , spared no criticism of the Christian Democrats who divided the spoils in city hall .
1352	The mayor , Pietro Giubilo , had to quit in the face of corruption allegations involving companies linked to Communion and Liberation .
1353	He was never more than the creature of Mr Andreotti 's key fixer , Vittorio ‘ The Shark ’ Sbardella .
1354	Yet Mr Andreotti moved smoothly into the premiership .
1355	One senses that people do not trifle with ‘ The Shark ’ , whose background is in the seedier recesses of legal neo-fascism .
1356	Between the embarrassment of frank sleaziness , the vicious campaigns of Il Sabato against Mr De Mita ( then a serving prime minister ) and the evidence of its own eyes , the Italian church began distancing itself from both Communion and Liberation and Mr Sbardella .
1357	Frightened , Communion and Liberation has now disowned Il Sabato , removing its directors and leaving the weekly in the hands of Mr Sbardella .
1358	The Bishops applauded .
1359	Mr Andreotti 's supporters may triumph in the elections .
1360	But their patron , though ensconced in the Prime Minister 's palace , is clearly more estranged from the mainstream of Catholic politics than at any time in his 40-year career .
1361	It is a sin for which neither absolution nor salvation may readily be forthcoming .
1362	Bush 's tax cut tests Democratic mettle
1363	From JOHN LICHFIELD in Washington
1364	DEMOCRATIC leaders will make desperate attempts this week to prevent President Bush from claiming a Congressional majority for conservative economic policies , similar to the one enjoyed by President Reagan in his early years .
1365	The Democratic leadership in the Senate is anxious to reverse the handsome victory by Mr Bush in the House of Representatives last week , when 64 Democrats voted with the Republicans to sweep through a two-year cut in capital gains taxes .
1366	Senator George Mitchell of Maine , the Democratic majority leader in the Senate , said yesterday that he was confident that the senior house of Congress would dismantle the temporary tax cut .
1367	Congressional officials predict , however , that a truncated version of the tax break will pass the Senate this week , allowing the White House to trumpet a one-two victory over the relatively untried Democratic leadership on Capitol Hill .
1368	Such a victory would also permit Mr Bush to claim a Republican-conservative Democrat working majority in Congress for his ‘ no new taxes , growth will solve everything ’ economic policy .
1369	It would , however , leave prospects for medium-term , or even short-term , progress in solving the federal budget deficit more confused than ever .
1370	The dispute has left the bipartisan efforts to reduce the deficit in , at least temporary , tatters .
1371	The Republicans claim that the capital gains cut ( from 28 per cent to 19.6 per cent for two years ) would stimulate investment and create jobs .
1372	The Democratic leaders insist that the cut is an unwarranted giveaway to the wealthy which will have no significant effect on the economy and deepen the deficit .
1373	In reality , the squabble is more over slogans and symbols left over from the Reagan years than anything substantial .
1374	This begs the question why the Democrats and the White House are staging such a divisive quarrel , at a time when agreement on a deficit-cutting budget for 1990 is already overdue ( the nominal deadline passed yesterday ) .
1375	Some pundits suggest that the capital gains tax battle is a shrewd White House softening-up exercise for an even more aggressive assault on the Democratic leaders in the next two to three weeks , designed to force a 1990 deficit-cutting agreement on Republican terms .
1376	This flies in the face of the cautious nature of the Bush administration .
1377	Congressional sources believe the White House saw the chance for a quick , psychologically valuable victory over the Democratic leaders .
1378	Ecuador holds drug lord
1379	From JOHN LICHFIELD in Washington
1380	BOGOTA ( Reuter ) — Colombia was reported yesterday to be seeking the extradition of a suspected cocaine baron held in neighbouring Ecuador as a wave of bombings , believed to have been carried out by drug traffickers , continued .
1381	Police sent a five-man mission to Ecuador to bring back Evaristo Porras Ardila , the most important figure detained in the government 's six-week crackdown , according to the daily El Tiempo .
1382	Mr Porras , considered a chieftain of the Medellin cocaine cartel , was arrested on Thursday in the northern town of Tulcan , about 10 miles from the Colombian border , and was to be handed over to Colombian authorities ‘ as a show of Ecuador 's support ’ for the drug crackdown , an Ecuadorean spokesman said .
1383	News of Mr Porras 's arrest followed the explosion of 13 bombs at the weekend , some of which damaged six schools in Bogota .
1384	Two teenage girls and a woman were hurt .
1385	In Medellin , a three-week lull in bombings was broken on Saturday night when a dynamite blast damaged two telephone control boxes .
1386	Baby deaths ‘ due to crack ’
1387	By JOHN LICHFIELD
1388	WASHINGTON — The city 's infant mortality rate has surged to the level of some Third World countries , largely as a result of cocaine-addiction among young women , writes John Lichfield .
1389	Some 169 Washington babies died before their first birthday in the first six months of this year , bringing the capital 's infant mortality rate to 32.3 deaths for every 1,000 live births , a 50 per cent increase on 1988 .
1390	This is more than triple the national average , itself one of the worst in the developed world .
1391	Health officials blame the increasing use by women of crack , the smokable form of cocaine .
1392	Smoking crack during pregnancy can cause low birth-weight , respiratory problems and premature labour .
1393	In acute cases , the babies are born addicted to cocaine .
1394	Officials also blame last year 's Congress decision to ban the public funding of abortions in Washington .
1395	They say drug-abusing mothers who would previously have had an abortion are bearing sickly babies with low chances of survival .
1396	The city 's baby death rate now compares with that of Argentina , Venezuela , Thailand and Paraguay .
1397	Court Circular
1398	By JOHN LICHFIELD
1399	BUCKINGHAM PALACE 30 September : The Princess Royal this morning visited Hampshire and was received on arrival by the Deputy Lieutenant for Hampshire ( Captain MPR Boyle ) .
1400	Her Royal Highness , President of the Royal Yachting Association , attended the 1.3 Litre World Powerboat Championships and opened the Southampton Vessel Traffic Services Centre .
1401	The Princess Royal travelled in an aircraft of The Queen 's Flight .
1402	Major Nicholas Barne was in attendance .
1403	1 October : The Prince of Wales attended a service in Dornoch Cathedral to celebrate the 750th anniversary of Dornoch Cathedral Parish .
1404	Subsequently , His Royal Highness visited the Lawson Memorial Hospital , Golspie .
1405	Commander Richard Aylard RN was in attendance .
1406	1 October : The Princess Royal , Patron , Royal Lymington Yacht Club , this morning attended the X One-Design Class Division Invitation Race at Lymington , Hampshire and was received on arrival by the Vice-Commodore ( Mr John Guillaume ) .
1407	Her Royal Highness travelled in an aircraft of The Queen 's Flight .
1408	ROYAL ENGAGEMENTS The Princess of Wales , Patron , Help the Aged , attends the annual council meeting of HelpAge International at 77 Crouch End Hill , London N8 .
1409	The Princess Royal opens the new Hassy Carrot Growers ' New Packhouse at Whitehall Farm , Iselham , Cambridgeshire ; visits Lincolnshire ; opens the new George Adams and Sons Factory at Spalding ; visits the recording studios of the National Tape Magazine for the Blind at Lilac Cottage , New Bolingbroke ; as President , National Agricultural Centre Rural Trust , opens a new housing development at Mareham-le-Fen ; opens the extension to Kirkby on Bain Church of England Primary School ; and this evening , as Patron , College of Occupational Therapists , attends a reception and dinner at St James 's Palace .
1410	The Duke of Kent , Vice Chairman of the British Overseas Board , visits Sweden and Finland .
1411	The Duchess of Kent , as Patron , attends the launch of Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund 's leaflet ‘ Help is There ’ as part of the Europe Against Cancer Year at London Weekend Television , South Bank Television Centre , London SE1 .
1412	Appointments
1413	By JOHN LICHFIELD
1414	Maj-Gen Sir Christopher Airy , to be Private Secretary to The Prince and Princess of Wales , in succession to Sir John Riddell .
1415	Mr BGJ Canty , to be Governor of Anguilla , in succession to Mr GO Whittaker .
1416	Admiral Sir Derek Reffell , to be Governor and Commander-in-Chief , Gibraltar , in succession to Air Chief-Marshal Sir Peter Terry .
1417	Mr Christopher Starns , to be secretary of the British Importers Confederation .
1418	Mr Angus Stewart Macdonald , to be a Crown Estate Commissioner , in succession to Sir Iain Mark Tennant .
1419	Mr Oscar Henry Colburn , and Mr John Nigel Courtenay James , to be re-appointed .
1420	Anniversaries
1421	By JOHN LICHFIELD
1422	On this day : Saladin entered Jerusalem , 1187 ; the Duke of York captured Alkmaar in the Netherlands , 1799 ; Rome became the capital city of Italy , 1870 ; Brigham Young , Mormon leader , was arrested for bigamy , 1871 ; the first Royal Naval submarine was launched at Barrow , 1901 ; the first rugby football match was played at Twickenham , 1909 ; Italy invaded Ethiopia , 1935 ; the liner Empress of Britain , bound for Canada with refugees , was sunk , 1940 ; the British Council received a Royal Charter , 1940 ; 338 people died when the Queen Mary liner collided with the British cruiser Curacao , which sank off the coast of Donegal , 1942 ; a new island , with a volcano at the centre , appeared off Fayal Island , Azores 1957 ; Guinea became an independent republic , 1958 ; the first London performance of the musical show Promises , Promises was presented , 1968 .
1423	Birthdays
1424	Gazette Page 24
1425	Obituary : Jean-Louis Tixier-Vignancour
1426	By PATRICK MARNHAM
1427	THE HIGHPOINT of the life of Jean-Louis Tixier-Vignancour came in 1968 when , against all odds , he saved the mutinous General Raoul Salan ( head of the Organisation de L'Armee Secrete ) from an expected death sentence for treason .
1428	With his deep voice , crumpled face , huge nose and ears and streak of cruelty , Maitre Tixier-Vignancour willingly symbolised all that was most demonic about France 's extreme right .
1429	After a brilliant student career at the Sorbonne he was called to the Paris Bar in 1926 .
1430	He started in political life as he meant to go on , sympathising with ‘ Action Francaise ’ and making his first political gesture at the age of 26 as one of the threatening , right-wing mob who were driven back by police gunfire when they tried to storm the Chamber of Deputies in February 1934 .
1431	In July 1940 , following France 's military defeat and occupation by the German army , Tixier-Vignancour was one of the majority of deputies who abolished the Third Republic and voted plenary powers to Marshal Petain .
1432	He was appointed to the post of ‘ Deputy Secretary-General of Information ’ in the Vichy regime but resigned in January 1941 .
1433	He was briefly interned by the Germans in Tunis , then liberated by the Americans .
1434	He ended the War holding both the Croix de Guerre and the petainiste decoration , the ‘ francisque ’ .
1435	In 1945 he was arrested by the new government and tried for collaborating .
1436	This charge could not be proved but the military tribunal condemned him to 10 years absence from public life .
1437	Tixier-Vignancour emerged from this period of enforced reflection with a deep loathing for General de Gaulle and when he returned to politics in 1955 he was one of the architects of the revival of the extreme right , using the popular cause of ‘ Algerie Francaise ’ as a rallying point .
1438	When those who fomented civil war in Algeria were brought to trial , Tixier-Vignancour was the natural choice to defend them .
1439	Four of his clients were executed , including Lt Degueldre , head of the Delta Commando and Col Jean-Marie Bastien-Thiry who nearly succeeded in blowing up General de Gaulle and his wife at Petit-Clamart in 1962 .
1440	As their advocate , Tixier-Vignancour had to accompany these four officers to the firing squad , thus witnessing a fate which might have been his own in 1945 .
1441	He was appalled by the experience .
1442	He subsequently popularised his political movement , the ‘ Rassemblement National ’ with the memorable slogan ‘ Against de Gaulle and Communism ’ .
1443	During the treason trials Tixier-Vignancour became notorious for a tactic known as ‘ the defence of blackmail ’ when he repeatedly threatened to call eminent witnesses such as General de Gaulle and the Prime Minister Michel Debre , hinting that they too were involved in criminal plots .
1444	He pulled this trick once too often against Debre , and was horrified one morning to see the Prime Minister sitting in the witness box , waiting to be cross-examined .
1445	Since Tixier-Vignancour did not actually have any questions to ask him he decided to bluff it out to the end .
1446	‘ You are Michel Debre , ’ he said in his most sardonic tones .
1447	‘ That is correct . ’
1448	'You are ( even more menacingly ) the Prime Minister of France . ’
1449	'Yes ' .
1450	Long pause .
1451	‘ Thank-you very much .
1452	No more questions ’ .
1453	End of the defence of blackmail .
1454	Tixier-Vignancour 's success in retricting General Salan 's punishment to life imprisonment in 1968 so angered President de Gaulle that he considered resignation .
1455	By then ‘ Tixier ’ had taken his anti-Gaullist crusade to the point of running himself as a presidential candidate .
1456	Without any proper party organisation he fought a brilliant campaign in 1965 , canvassing the French throughout August ‘ on every beach from Dunkirk to Menton ’ .
1457	He was eliminated in the first round , coming fourth behind de Gaulle , Mitterrand and Jean Lecanuet .
1458	He promptly consigned his five per cent of the vote to Mr Mitterrand in the second round , a gift whch the Socialist candidate happily accepted .
1459	With the death of Tixier-Vignancour a distinctive line of French politicians seems to have come to an end .
1460	It can be traced directly back to the anti-Dreyfusard cause of the late nineteenth century .
1461	Tixier-Vignancour declined to be described as ‘ anti-semitic ’ ( he once sued Sam White of the Evening Standard for calling him this ) but he was in no danger of winning a ‘ righteous gentile ’ award .
1462	His political heirs include Jean Marie Le Pen , leader of the ‘ Front National ’ and the left-wing advocate Maitre Jacques Verges who attempted to revive the ‘ defence of blackmail ’ during the 1987 trial of the SS officer Klaus Barbie .
1463	But neither of them can match the pungency of the original , an atmosphere of beaujolais , cigars and malevolence , and of political or legal plots being brewed in the all-night brasseries of Les Halles .
1464	Tixier-Vignancour 's declared hobby was collecting lead soldiers .
1465	Obituary : Virgil Thomson
1466	By PETER DICKINSON
1467	VIRGIL THOMSON was a composer and writer of originality , courage and wit formed by a unique mixture of American and French influences .
1468	Thomson was born in Kansas City in 1896 , studied at Harvard , and then mostly lived in Paris until 1940 .
1469	His Missouri childhood gave him access to Baptist hymns and church music , but at Harvard he was introduced to the writings of Gertrude Stein and the music of Erik Satie .
1470	These influences laid the foundations for the blend of the naive and the sophisticated which is the hallmark of Thomson 's maturity .
1471	Like many young American composers he studied with Nadia Boulanger , but after 1925 set out to achieve the ‘ discipline of spontaneity ’ which he found in Stein 's writings .
1472	When he collaborated directly with her in opera the result was of historical significance .
1473	First came Four Saints in Three Acts , produced in 1934 , and then The Mother of Us All ( 1947 ) , which demonstrated a new kind of plotless opera only now reaching a wider currency through the stage works of Philip Glass .
1474	In Four Saints Thomson 's informality was given free reign since he first of all improvised the music at the piano then , when it stuck , wrote it down to a figured bass .
1475	He said : ‘ I had wondered whether a piece so drenched in Anglican chant ( running from Gilbert and Sullivan to Morning Prayer and back ) could rise and sail . ’
1476	But the resulting mixture of hymns , folksy tunes and recitatives — at times of intoxicating banality — was a sensation .
1477	The opera , like Gershwin 's Porgy and Bess the following year , used an all-Black cast and the staging and choreography gave it a British connection since it was by Frederick Ashton .
1478	The Mother of Us All shows more continuity , but again much depends upon production in what is still a largely non-narrative opera .
1479	In 1936 , three years before Aaron Copland , Thomson started writing film scores which were a model of unobtrusive clarity and pertinence , combining American materials to suit documentaries such as The Plow that Broke the Plains and The River with the musique d'ameublement approach of Satie .
1480	His score for the film Louisiana Story was awarded the Pulitzer Prize in 1948 .
1481	Another response to a visual stimulus was Thomson 's series of musical portraits of people such as Picasso and Aaron Copland .
1482	The first of these was written in 1928 and they number about 150 .
1483	Just as Thomson transferred Stein 's literary abstraction to music , so these portraits unusually employ the painter 's technique of drawing the sitter from life : an ideal combination of Thomson 's habit of immediate response with an actual subject .
1484	The results are terse and sharply etched , like the best line drawings .
1485	Thomson could control words with the same fastidiousness as notes .
1486	He always felt that effective musical criticism began by being well written , and he never lost his liveliness .
1487	One never quite knew what he was going to say next .
1488	He started by writing occasional articles but in 1939 he wrote The State of Music , a trenchant and provocative assessment of the machinery of the musical profession at the time .
1489	From 1940 to 1954 he wrote regularly for the New York Herald Tribune and four volumes of his notices have appeared in book form .
1490	He wrote a fulsome 400-page autobiography , characteristically entitled Virgil Thomson on Virgil Thomson , and a personal survey , American Music since 1910 , appeared in 1972 , followed recently by a selected edition of his letters .
1491	As both composer and critic he touched both sides of the coin : A climate of receptivity is what the artist most desires .
1492	It is also a thing that even the most experienced reviewer can not always offer .
1493	Thomson 's judgements about music were not always as accurate as his confident expression implied : he invited discussion .
1494	Above all he restored the focus of music criticism onto the music itself .
1495	He made no secret of his Francophile enthusiasms , in reaction to the earlier domination of American music by Germans , and he was one of the first writers to register the importance of jazz .
1496	He fearlessly attacked convention , which caused problems when he pitched into established reputations .
1497	It has become increasingly apparent that Thomson belonged to the American experimental tradition .
1498	He anticipated some of the enthusiasms of John Cage , whom he first met in 1941 .
1499	A few years later Thomson recognised Cage as ‘ the most original composer in America , if not the world … ’ and Cage repaid the compliment by writing the works section of a monograph on Thomson .
1500	But finally , in spite of their common roots in Satie and Stein , Thomson felt that Cage 's aesthetic was destructive .
1501	Thomson 's songs contain some of his finest work .
1502	There are Stein settings , such as ‘ Portrait of FB ’ , but also cycles such as Five Songs from William Blake , Prayers and Praises and a cantata based on poems by Edward Lear .
1503	Thomson was also prolific in instrumental music on both chamber and solo scale .
1504	For many years Thomson lived in New York in his apartment at the Chelsea Hotel .
1505	From there , like a buzzard in its eyrie , he would make forays round the US and abroad in spite of his advanced age .
1506	He seemed a genial and indestructible landmark in the history of American music , in spite of defective hearing which had bothered him since the late Seventies .
1507	He had a photograph of himself on his postcards and he signed his letters following the original tailpiece ‘ everbest ’ .
1508	Thomson came from a generation of American composers which had to find its own way without benefit of university patronage .
1509	In that kind of free market he thrived and survived — and so will the best of his work .
1510	Obituary : Thomas Keller
1511	By HUGH MATHESON
1512	THOMI KELLER is the outstanding figure in the history of international rowing .
1513	He was President of FISA ( Federation Internationale des Societes d'Aviron ) , the world governing body , for 30 years ; and most of this body 's attitudes and practices reflect the force of his strict , but genial personality .
1514	Most athletes first encountered him as a voice , bellowing in multi-lingual fury at officials who had broken rules or arrangements designed to make racing safer or more fair .
1515	He was elected to succeed Gaston Mullegg as President of FISA when he was 33 and still competing in the Swiss rowing team .
1516	He did not loosen his links with the athletes when projected upwards into the Presidency .
1517	Provided their behaviour was sportsmanlike and safe , oarsmen found only encouragement and humour from a President who was always among them .
1518	Keller 's Zurich upbringing made him into a skiier and sculler , and he raced for the Grasshopper club .
1519	He competed for the Swiss cross-country and ski-jumping team at the Student Winter Games and later concentrated on single sculls .
1520	In 1950 , he was Swiss sculls champion and finished third in the European championships before moving to Manila to work for his family 's private multinational company , Eduard Keller Ltd , for four years .
1521	On his return , Keller was Swiss champion again in 1955 and was bitterly disappointed when the Swiss chose to boycott the 1956 Olympics after the Russian intervention in Hungary .
1522	FISA was then a relatively unimportant body which organised European and other championships and participated in the running of Olympic regattas .
1523	As a rich , forceful young man , Keller had been earmarked as a likely future president , even before Mullegg was killed in an aircrash in 1958 .
1524	Rowing was transformed in the breadth and depth of participation over the 30 years of his term .
1525	He sat on the appropriate boards of the International Olympic Committee and was President of the General Assembly of International Sports Federations for 17 years .
1526	These positions were not held for his own status but to promote the cause of rowing where it needed clout .
1527	He successfully defended rowing as an Olympic sport and in 1976 introduced women 's events , which have now expanded to six classes .
1528	His personal preference for sculling over rowing assisted the introduction of quadruple sculls to world championship and Olympic competition .
1529	Keller was made a Steward of Henley Royal Regatta in 1976 , a time when the proliferation of new six-lane , still-water courses around the world , which had emerged under his guidance , seemed a threat to the regatta founded in 1829 .
1530	But it was the spirit of Henley , with huge crowds enjoying amateur sport , presented with administrative finesse , which Keller took as the yardstick for the international circuit .
1531	He loved the place and he returned every year to play an often small part as umpire of races between undistinguished clubs far below the Olympic standard he was obliged to administer .
1532	He said this summer that as he gradually wound down his involvement in sport , Henley would be the last thing he would give up .
1533	During his term as President of FISA he gradually reduced his role in Eduard Keller Ltd and used the company offices to provide a world headquarters for rowing .
1534	The sport is now obliged to find income from the more normal sources of television and sponsorship , to replace his largely unacknowledged private patronage .
1535	In spite of his gift to the sport , Keller was anxious not to abuse his status as President and never went to a rowing event unless invited .
1536	Because of this , he had never seen the Oxford and Cambridge boat race until this year .
1537	He was enthralled by the entire proceeding and remarked that only the English could make a contest between two crews which would not rank in the World 's top 10 into a bigger spectacle than the Olympic final .
1538	The final task he set himself for his Presidency , which was due to end next year , was to weed out of the Regatta calendar all the rowing courses which could be made unfair by the wind .
1539	He had recently travelled from Tasmania to Norway in search of the perfect 2,000 metres of flat water .
1540	It was a blessing that , in response to congratulations on the superb World Championship Regatta at Bled in Yugoslavia three weeks ago , he was able to reply , ‘ Yes … and best of all , the conditions were fair throughout ’ .
1541	The Bar Conference : Donaldson sets the tone for battle over rights of audience
1542	By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES , Legal Correspondent
1543	BARRISTERS could retain much of their monopoly over advocacy in the higher courts under a subtle agenda for discussion spelled out by Lord Donaldson , the Master of the Rolls , as he opened the Bar 's annual conference in London at the weekend .
1544	Signalling the beginning of a lower-key campaign against the plans of the Lord Chancellor , Lord Mackay of Clashfern , to give increased rights of audience in the High and Crown court to solicitors , Lord Donaldson called on the Bar to put aside the ‘ trauma , the acrimony and the recriminations ’ which followed Lord Mackay 's Green Papers and to abandon the hustings .
1545	Lord Donaldson said objectives due to be included in this autumn 's Bill were ‘ total freedom of choice for the client , unless the interests of justice otherwise require ’ .
1546	‘ When those concerned turn their attention to this problem , they may find they have to make a distinction between litigation in which there is a direct public interest in the result and that in which the public interest is limited to ensuring that an adequate system of justice is available .
1547	‘ In the first category we have criminal cases , judicial review and cases which involve matrimonial status and the welfare of children or those under a disability .
1548	In many of them , particularly criminal cases , the interests of the client may be quite different from those of the public .
1549	‘ In these cases the interests of justice may demand special requirements such as , for example , that the preparation and presentation of the case be in separate and independent hands ’ .
1550	In the second category , general civil cases , parties should be able to choose their own lawyers because the interests of justice would be inherently less likely to fetter the client 's right of choice .
1551	Lord Donaldson implied , however , that solicitors who exercised their new rights of audience in these cases ought to be expected to concentrate on advocacy .
1552	While emphasising that he had not reached any firm conclusions , Lord Donaldson 's voice will be a powerful one in behind-the-scenes manoeuvres as rules governing the exercise of the new advocacy rights are hammered out away from the parliamentary battlefield .
1553	The rules will be drawn up by the Law Society ‘ having regard ’ to suggestions made by a new lay-dominated independent advisory committee on legal education and conduct .
1554	They will have to be approved by the Lord Chancellor and be subject to the ‘ concurrence ’ of four senior Supreme Court judges , of whom Lord Donaldson will be one .
1555	In practice , initial drafts of rules will be the subject of ongoing discussions between all four parties .
1556	The four will have to have regard to the ‘ interest of justice ’ objective .
1557	But on the other hand , the statute will also include a clear intention that extended rights of audience are put into practical effect as soon as the necessary conditions have been met .
1558	A majority of judges said in their response to the Green Papers that standards of conduct and competence might decline if lawyers who worked in partnerships and took instructions directly from clients ( most solicitors ) were allowed widespread access to the higher courts .
1559	Lord Donaldson 's formula for settling the rights of audience controversy was viewed as an adept political move by some delegates .
1560	Alternative dividing lines which have been informally mooted , such as simply restricting solicitor-advocates in Crown Court jury trials to the less serious cases , had been viewed as difficult to support as a matter of principle .
1561	Lord Donaldson 's remarks were greeted with cautious enthusiasm by Bar leaders .
1562	Desmond Fennell , QC , the Bar 's chairman , said that he was ‘ greatly encouraged ’ by Lord Donaldson 's indication that the interests of justice objective would prevail .
1563	Roger Henderson , QC , the Bar 's public affairs spokesman , warned that the words used in the White Paper were open to different interpretations , but said : ‘ Lord Donaldson has plainly interpreted the White Paper on the basis that there has been a major change from the Green Paper . ’
1564	John Hayes , secretary general of the Law Society , said he regarded the entire matter as up for debate .
1565	‘ We look forward to the discussions .
1566	The Master of the Rolls has always been keen to find a middle way . ’
1567	Lord Donaldson attacked the White Paper 's suggestion that it might be in the public interest to allow other professions , such as accountants , to be given rights of audience in the courts .
1568	The Bar Conference : Aid fund for injury claims ‘ should be tested ’
1569	By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES , Legal Correspondent
1570	A TRIAL SCHEME should be set up to assess the validity of a contingent legal aid fund to finance personal injury claims for those too well-off to qualify for legal aid but too poor to pay fees , the conference was told .
1571	Under the scheme , successful claimants would pay about 10 per cent of their winnings to a central fund which would meet the costs of unsuccessful claims .
1572	George Pulman , QC , a member of the Bar Council 's working party on contingent fees , told a conference workshop on financing litigation that unlike other forms of contingency fee arrangement , lawyers would have no personal interest in the outcome of litigation and there would be no ‘ legal aid blackmail ’ — where cases are legally aided the normal ‘ costs follow the event ’ rule does not apply and defendants have to meet their own costs even when they win .
1573	In working out the percentage deduction from the damages of successful claimants , comparison should be made with trade union funded personal injury litigation where costs were paid to winning defendants .
1574	‘ My initial inquiries suggest that a figure of significantly less than 10 per cent is a real possibility , ’ Mr Pulman said .
1575	Initial government money would be needed to get the scheme off the ground .
1576	But Mr Pulman estimated that could be repaid within two years .
1577	A four-year trial scheme should be set up using firms outside London specialising in actions for trade union members .
1578	Legal Aid Board proposals to grant ‘ franchises ’ to selected solicitors ' firms doing legal aid advice work under the ‘ green form ’ scheme will enable the board and lawyers to jointly improve the system , John Pitts , the board chairman , said .
1579	In return for assurances of service to a defined quality , franchised firms would enjoy benefits such as easier administration , devolved responsibility for some aspects of case management , and faster payment .
1580	John Hayes , secretary-general of the Law Society , said the advantages ought to apply to all solicitors and the board should not seek to produce artificial criteria for selection .
1581	‘ There should be a much higher threshold at which solicitors would need to consult the board .
1582	The system I would like to see is solicitors being given the job of approving up to £500 of legal aid work , with spot checks on quality , taking off any who are found to have abused it . ’
1583	The means test for all legal aid work could also be simplified and handled directly by solicitors , again subject to careful spot check monitoring , Mr Hayes said .
1584	The Bar Conference : Plea for new ‘ lawyer-free ’ hearings on small claims
1585	By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES , Legal Correspondent
1586	A LAWYER-FREE small claims procedure , easily operated by the do-it-yourself litigant and staffed by a new body of volunteer ‘ civil justices ’ , is needed to combat problems of cost and delay Lord Donaldson , the Master of the Rolls , said .
1587	The new breed of civil justices would be similar to JPs in the criminal field but would act as arbitrators in county courts .
1588	‘ The only qualifications they would need would be common sense , a judicial temperament and an elementary knowledge of the limited aspects of the law which are applicable to such disputes , ’ Lord Donaldson said .
1589	‘ At the risk of deeply shocking you , I have to say that in relation to small claims , we have to get rid of the lawyers . ’
1590	They were ‘ overqualified and not cost-effective for small cases ’ .
1591	He added : ‘ The aim must be to produce small claims procedures which can be understood and followed by the do-it-yourself litigant . ’
1592	If assistance was needed it should be provided by the courts themselves , by Citizens Advice Bureaux or by similar agencies .
1593	In the minority of cases where representation was really needed it should be provided by ‘ para-legals ’ , able to charge less , in line with their lower qualifications and overheads .
1594	Lord Donaldson said afterwards that his proposal would not lead to a downgrading of justice .
1595	‘ At the moment county court registrars are often just using their common sense , not their knowledge of law .
1596	I ca n't see why the ordinary housewife should n't do it . ’
1597	He predicted there would be no shortage of volunteers , who could acquire the necessary skills on short courses .
1598	‘ There is nothing so fascinating as other people 's disputes . ’
1599	The system outlined by Lord Donaldson , a man not known for his left tendencies , bears marked similarities to those operated in a number of eastern bloc countries .
1600	The drift of his remarks is likely to find favour with the Lord Chancellor , Lord Mackay of Clashfern , who said last year that many litigants wanted fuller participation in the legal process rather than acting as bystanders in cases conducted by lawyers .
1601	Lord Donaldson then attacked Lord Mackay 's White Paper proposals for banks and building societies to undertake conveyancing .
1602	Although the near-monopoly enjoyed by solicitors was indefensible because it related only to the preparation of documents , ‘ there is a real need for consumer protection and I am far from sure that the White Paper proposals meet this need , ’ he said .
1603	Conveyancing documents should include a certificate by the purchaser saying either that he had been fully advised by a wholly independent practitioner or that he had declined such advice — and the certificate should contain a prominent ‘ health warning ’ against declining to take it .
1604	The Bar Conference : Commercial judges ‘ need highest pay ’
1605	By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES , Legal Correspondent
1606	JUDGES in the Commercial Court should get higher salaries than other High Court colleagues , the conference heard .
1607	There was a pressing need for more judges to help to reduce increasing delays , Richard Williams , a solicitor , said .
1608	‘ The unedifying scramble for a free judge causes great embarrassment to solicitors vis-a-vis their clients . ’
1609	Extra appointments could be financed by the court 's customers paying higher charges when cases were set down for trial .
1610	A more difficult problem was ensuring the extra judges were of a sufficiently high calibre .
1611	‘ If more judges are required because of the greater degree of litigious activity it is logical to assume that those successful counsel of high calibre who would be candidates for judge 's office would find it economically more gratifying to remain as advocates ’ , he said .
1612	Bearing in mind the commercial raison d'etre of the court , there was a case for paying its judges more than those in other divisions .
1613	There could also be a Commercial Court of Appeal with its own , higher paid , judges .
1614	Mr Williams said delay was the main complaint solicitors faced from clients .
1615	The Bar Conference : Children 's recollection usually reliable says psychiatrist
1616	By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES , Legal Correspondent
1617	RESEARCH shows that a child 's recall is usually accurate , and errors are of omission rather than commission , Dr Danya Glaser , a consultant child psychiatrist , said .
1618	But this does not ensure credibility , which is related to the way the child 's account is obtained .
1619	‘ If details are requested which , from the child 's point of view , are peripheral to the event and therefore not recalled , the child may feel obliged to fabricate one . ’
1620	Research had found that even very young children do not ‘ go along ’ with erroneous suggestions concerning the essence of their experiences .
1621	It was vital to take account of children 's cognitive and emotional responses when evaluating their evidence .
1622	‘ Denial is present in 85 per cent to 90 per cent of cases .
1623	It is in this context that a reticent , hesitant and anxious account , sometimes followed by a retraction , is likely to be credible , ’ she said .
1624	The Bar Conference : Barristers in sex trials defended
1625	By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES , Legal Correspondent
1626	REPEATED attacks on cross-examination by defence barristers of the victims of alleged sexual offences were misplaced and naive , David Cocks QC , chairman of the Criminal Bar Association , told the conference .
1627	Cross-examination was ‘ the greatest legal engine ever invented for the discovery of truth ’ , he said .
1628	Mr Cocks predicted that advocates would have to adapt their techniques in cases involving children and other vulnerable witnesses , but warned : ‘ It would be disastrous for an excessive preoccupation with welfare to erode the defendant 's rights and to undermine the role of his advocate . ’
1629	The climate of opinion that children never lie about sexual abuse was ‘ dangerous ’ , he added .
1630	Mr Cocks also criticised judges for making uninformed pronouncements about whether child witnesses were old enough to give evidence .
1631	Under the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 , judges must be satisfied that the child is of sufficient intelligence to justify the reception of the evidence and understands the duty of telling the truth .
1632	In practice , children under the age of eight are rarely called as witnesses and judges still follow a 1958 House of Lords ruling that a jury could not attach any importance to the evidence of a child of five .
1633	‘ This is a subject on which judges need , and should have , expert assistance from a clinical psychologist and not be left to flounder through what may be an ill-informed and perfunctory form of inquisition before the child gives evidence . ’
1634	Mr Cocks went on to criticise video interviewing techniques of police and social workers .
1635	‘ Might there not be a case for putting the initial interview in the hands of an educational psychologist skilled in eliciting a history without being committed to what the social workers revealingly call ‘ disclosure ’ ? ' , he suggested .
1636	Once initial interviews with children had been videotaped , the prosecution should have the right to apply for a pre-trial hearing before the judge , in informal surroundings , at which the child could be examined and cross-examined .
1637	But there were serious objections to using the videotaped interview as a complete substitute for the child 's evidence in chief at the trial , because of the unsatisfactory nature of the questioning and because it would cause difficulties for the prosecution .
1638	First Birdwatching Fair in Rutland Water , Leicestershire
1639	By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES , Legal Correspondent
1640	Some of the ‘ twitchers ’ at Britain 's first Birdwatching Fair , held at Rutland Water in Leicestershire over the weekend .
1641	Proceeds went to a campaign against the annual slaughter of 900 million migrating birds around the Mediterranean .
1642	Contemporary Art Market : Paintings poised between Expressionism and Romanticism
1643	By EDWARD LUCIE-SMITH
1644	MUCH OF the painting in London commercial galleries hovers somewhere between Expressionism and a more traditional British Romanticism .
1645	A good example is the William Tillyer show at Bernard Jacobson .
1646	Tillyer sees nature as luscious and womb-like .
1647	The way he interprets it owes a lot to the work of the late Ivon Hitchens , who used a similar technique , with broad swirls and patches of paint , and little attention to details .
1648	The exhibition indicates that Tillyer 's work has been moving away from Hitchens and closer to American landscape-abstractionists , notably Helen Frankenthaler .
1649	Some of the pictures are American in scale — very much bigger than anything he has shown before — and this makes the resemblance more apparent .
1650	( Prices from £7,000-£40,000 ) .
1651	Kark Weschke , at the Redfern Gallery , is Expressionist in a more orthodox fashion — not surprisingly , since he was born in Germany in 1925 and did not come to England until 1948 .
1652	His painting , now , is a slightly odd mixture of German and British influences .
1653	One very ambitious painting , of Gordale Scar , challenges recollection of the huge romantic canvas showing the same spot , painted by the early nineteenth-century British Romantic artist James Ward and now in the Tate Gallery .
1654	Other canvases , such as Weschke 's awkward but powerful version of Europa and the Bull , are much closer to German Expressionism of the pre-First World War variety .
1655	( Paintings from £7,000-£12,000 .
1656	Drawings from £500-£1,200 ) .
1657	Agnew 's has an exhibition by the Yorkshire artist Len Tabner .
1658	Most of the works are either pastels , often with the addition of charcoal and graphite , or watercolours .
1659	There are seascapes , bleak , upland landscapes and industrial scenes .
1660	All are themes Turner might have used and Tabner is clearly conscious of his example .
1661	David Brown , in an introduction to the show , also suggests an affinity with the Scottish painter , William McTaggart ( 1835-1910 ) .
1662	This is appropriate in more ways than one , since , like McTaggart , Tabner has remained somewhat apart from the more experimental tendencies of his time .
1663	But there are many good things here , nevertheless - these are skillful , powerful drawings , which impress by their sure sense of rhythm .
1664	( From £1,000-£9,000 ) .
1665	The Scottish Gallery has an exhibition of paintings by Roderick Carmichael , an Edinburgh-born artist who has spent the last 10 years in Australia .
1666	Few of the canvases are primarily concerned with landscape , but it tends to find its way into most of them .
1667	The technique and colour are Expressionist , but the paintings also have a lingering hint of Pop Art because they are frequently concerned with symbolic objects .
1668	A rather kitsch ceramic stool in the form of an elephant wearing a howdah is the chief image in a couple .
1669	( From £4,500-£10,000 ) .
1670	Prisoners of war fund ‘ is failing needy old soldiers ’
1671	By JAMES DALRYMPLE
1672	A FUND standing at about £200,000 which was raised to give aid and comfort to homecoming British prisoners after the Second World War is alleged to be growing in direct proportion to the number of old soldiers dying without ever seeing a penny of it .
1673	The fund , raised in 1944 in the Midlands , was invested by officials of the Royal Warwickshire Regiment and , apart from the stock market crash of two years ago , it has steadily increased .
1674	In one 10-year period from the mid-1970s it rose from just over £30,000 to nearly £250,000 , and analysts calculate that in 20 years - when all the men it was specifically designed to help will be long dead — it will be worth well over £1m and increasing in value at more than £100,000 a year .
1675	Yet , the Labour MP Jeff Rooker claims , there have been examples of Royal Warwickshire prisoners of war seeking desperately needed help who have been given as little as £25 , while many more have been means-tested and found ‘ unqualified ’ for even basic financial assistance .
1676	There has also been malpractice in the past by officials administering the fund , he claims , in which thousands of pounds were used to foot the bill for regimental social functions .
1677	This was privately admitted by senior officers who took over the running of the fund two years ago , and after an inquiry by the Charity Commission more than £3,000 was repaid from regimental funds .
1678	Mr Rooker , MP for Perry Barr in Birmingham , discovered the existence of the POWs Fund in 1976 and publicised it in the Midlands .
1679	He received about 20 letters from ex-regimental POWs who were in need ; these were passed on to the regiment .
1680	Mr Rooker said that the 20 letters resulted in only seven men receiving financial help .
1681	The highest-paid got £40 and the lowest-paid , £25 , in a payout of £220 — even though the fund then stood at £58,000 .
1682	Of the other 13 POWs , six were given nothing , five either died at that time or could not be traced , and two refused to submit to means testing .
1683	‘ Some of these men had been so badly damaged , both physically and mentally , by their experiences on the battlefield and in POW camps that their lives were ruined . ’
1684	Mr Rooker said money from the fund ‘ simply never got to the people who needed it because it was n't publicised enough and because the regimental administrators were inefficient .
1685	Now it is standing at a huge sum , growing rapidly , and it is still not going where it is needed ’ .
1686	He added : ‘ The sane thing to do would be to take perhaps half of the total sum , make a determined effort to find every surviving POW , and share the money equally with them . ’
1687	The man in charge of the fund , Brigadier Jimmy Chater , admitted that there had been problems with finding and helping Royal Warwickshire POWs , and agreed that the income from the fund exceeded the benefits paid out .
1688	He said that some time ago the POWs fund was merged with a general purposes benefit fund for all old comrades of the regiment , but that POWs were given priority in any benefit payouts .
1689	‘ I wish it were true that the fund will continue to grow , but we are at the mercy of the markets , and we must keep a healthy capital amount for all needy old soldiers down on their luck .
1690	If we were to wind up the POWs fund and pay out the money once and for all to all POWs that we could find , we could run into severe problems in the next 10 to 15 years as these chaps get very old and need help even more .
1691	‘ There were problems in the past with the way the fund was run , but when I took over a couple of years ago we took a very long look at our accounting system and put matters right .
1692	‘ Now , we advertise repeatedly for any POWs who are in trouble , and we are only too pleased to help them .
1693	I regret the allegation of means testing .
1694	When we are asked for assistance we call in the Services ’ social services people , the SSAFA ( Soldiers ' , Sailors ' and Airmen 's Families Association ) , who decide what help is needed , and we provide it . ’
1695	Whitehall Watch : Poacher turns gamekeeper to scrutinise Civil Service : Peter Hennessy talks to Sir Angus Fraser , head of the efficiency unit
1696	By PETER HENNESSY
1697	A YEAR ago Sir Angus Fraser took over from Sir Robin Ibbs as the Prime Minister 's efficiency adviser and part-time head of her efficiency unit .
1698	It was a tough assignment for two reasons .
1699	First , Sir Robin and his team had developed , and persuaded ministers to adopt , the most radical plan — the so-called Next Steps — for restructuring the Civil Service in nearly 150 years .
1700	No successor could hope for such an earth-moving tenure as that .
1701	Secondly , Sir Angus was barely a year out of the Civil Service after a career which had taken him to the chairmanship of the Customs and Excise .
1702	Would n't today 's permanent secretaries rather resent one of their own returning to tell them how to overturn the habits of a lifetime ?
1703	Twelve months on , Sir Angus is not really worried on either score .
1704	Preparing the Next Steps — the conversion of the Civil Service 's businesses into executive agencies standing free of policy-making departments — tended to monopolise the attention of the efficiency unit with its tiny staff .
1705	The Next Steps is now a separate project run by Peter Kemp in the Cabinet Office .
1706	Renewing the emphasis on the unit 's original raison d'etre created by Lord Rayner , the Prime Minister 's first efficiency adviser — the scrutiny programme of efficiency studies — was necessary , Sir Angus said , as ‘ it had taken a bit of a setback ’ .
1707	He is very pleased with the ‘ good meaty topics ’ departments have been suggesting for scrutiny this year .
1708	He mentioned the Home Office-led investigation of state funding of the voluntary sector ; the Department of Education 's investigation of educational support grants , about £650m worth , given to local education authorities for tasks deemed especially important ; and the Department of Social Security 's review of the shortfall of contributions to contributory benefits , amounting to nearly £500m a year .
1709	As for old colleagues resenting his intrusion on their territory : ‘ Any external agent is going to be viewed with a certain amount of suspicion .
1710	I have n't noticed it .
1711	Having done the job myself , it helps me to understand that departments are being asked to review everything continuously .
1712	It does n't mean they get an easier ride , but it does mean I 'm not going to be utterly unreasonable in the demands I make . ’
1713	One thing Margaret Thatcher asked him to concentrate on in his Whitehall travels is the quality of departments ' planning machinery .
1714	This has been a focus of his first year and will be of his second .
1715	Occasionally , the efficiency unit scrutinises itself .
1716	So I asked Sir Angus to answer the basic questions he tells scrutineers to apply .
1717	Every scrutineer begins by asking ‘ What 's it for ? ’
1718	Sir Angus replied : ‘ We are for advising the Prime Minister , who is very interested in efficiency and effectiveness in the Civil Service .
1719	We are for bringing outside analysis to departments along with the office of the Minister for the Civil Service and the Treasury .
1720	The Treasury are the regulars .
1721	We are the irregulars . ’
1722	How much do you and your staff of eight cost ? ‘ £374,000 a year . ’
1723	Who are your customers ?
1724	‘ I am a servant of the Prime Minister .
1725	In another sense , it 's the departments with whom we work .
1726	In another sense , it 's the consumer or the taxpayer . ’
1727	Is the efficiency unit necessary ?
1728	‘ It 's necessary because the PM wants it .
1729	The question is whether the same remit could be fulfilled by different means ?
1730	We find that being cast in the role of external stimulator does serve a useful function .
1731	‘ If a department has an internal review it can get bogged down in internal considerations .
1732	We guarantee high-level attention from the permanent secretary and the minister .
1733	The results are less likely to seep into the sand . ’
1734	Like everyone else in late 1980s Whitehall , the words ‘ changing the culture ’ are constantly on Sir Angus ' lips .
1735	That , he says , is what the Next Steps is all about : ‘ It will succeed only if it changes the way business is done and accounted for . ’
1736	Is it going to work ?
1737	‘ Yes .
1738	When I left the Civil Service in 1987 I was rather pessimistic .
1739	But the way it 's moved on has been quite good .
1740	I reckon it 's pretty well irreversible . ’
1741	Salary increases for managers average 11%
1742	By BARRIE CLEMENT , Labour Editor
1743	PAY RISES for managers are averaging 11 per cent , almost double the level of a year ago , and accelerating , according to research published today .
1744	Those aged over 35 are receiving increases of 8.5 per cent , while younger colleagues are getting 12.9 per cent , the Reward Group reports in its biannual survey .
1745	Younger , more mobile employees , on an average of £13,700 a year , are enjoying bigger increases because companies are ‘ desperate ’ to keep them .
1746	Older managers , on £16,650 , are regarded as more stable and having reached their ‘ ceiling ’ .
1747	Overall , salary rises have almost doubled in a year .
1748	The average increase reported in the March survey was 8.5 per cent .
1749	In September last year it was 6.4 per cent .
1750	Four regions were found to be above the average : Scotland , 12.2 per cent ; the West Midlands 12 per cent ; the South-west 11.6 per cent ; and London 11.5 per cent .
1751	Rates in the West Midlands , however , are still 8.3 per cent below the national average .
1752	The biggest rises — about 12.6 per cent — are being won in smaller companies with a turnover of less than £5m .
1753	This suggests that such firms are reacting on a more ad hoc basis to pressure in the market , the report says .
1754	The mechanical engineering sector has seen the largest increase , at 15.3 per cent , although pay is 7.3 per cent below the national average .
1755	The ‘ love affair ’ with company cars is becoming more intense despite the Chancellor 's best efforts .
1756	Companies find it increasingly difficult to attract the right people in the £14,000 to £18,000 range unless they offer a car .
1757	Two years ago , less than 25 per cent had a car , now almost 35 per cent .
1758	The survey analysed nearly 21,000 salaries of senior managers to supervisors at more than 900 companies with a total workforce of 824,000 .
1759	Millions at risk in loan swap challenge
1760	By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
1761	A High Court case starting today pits local authorities and the City 's financial institutions against each other .
1762	Millions of pounds are at stake and one side is certain to receive a bloody nose .
1763	The legality of money market dealings by Hammersmith and Fulham Council in west London , which once amounted to exposure of £5bn is being challenged by its auditor , Anthony Hazell , a partner in Deloitte Haskins and Sells , with the support of the Audit Commission , the local authority financial watchdog .
1764	The council embarked on a series of complex and sophisticated manoeuvres , including interest rate swaps , swap options , and cash options which initially proved profitable — earning £13m — but which would now result in massive losses .
1765	Essentially , these manoeuvres are a way of managing debt to take advantage of interest rate changes , but the council went way beyond debt management into pure financial speculation .
1766	There are 77 other local authorities playing the markets in a similar , though less extensive , way , and a similar number of financial institutions are involved .
1767	All these transactions could be declared ultra vires , beyond the legal powers of local authorities and therefore invalid , if Hammersmith loses .
1768	The judges could complicate matters by ordering that the outcome of the deals be reversed , necessitating a mind-numbing series of calculations by the City .
1769	But , if Hammersmith wins and the deals are declared legal , the council will have to pay the losses on the transactions .
1770	These have mounted because in February Nicholas Ridley , then Secretary of State for the Environment , stopped any new deals and Hammersmith 's portfolio was largely weighted to the expectation that interest rates would be low , preventing the council from improving its position in the market .
1771	The council had wound down its holdings from £5bn to £2bn but its advisers had backed the wrong horse by predicting low interest rates .
1772	In an affidavit to be presented to the hearing , the auditor calculated that Hammersmith could lose £74m at current levels of interest rate and £186m if rates rose by 1 per cent .
1773	Given that this sum represents more than half the council 's average annual spending , the poll tax payers would be faced with a nightmare .
1774	The council 's fund established after Mr Ridley blocked the deals to pay back any losses is currently less than £20m .
1775	Fortunately for Hammersmith and its citizens , legal advisers for all parties concerned have been unequivocal , all suggesting a defeat for the council , which would mean Hammersmith would not have to pay the losses on the transactions .
1776	The deals stretch back to 1983 when the council was run by a Conservative-Liberal coalition .
1777	For several years the market playing was limited but early in 1988 , finance officers began taking options out on a massive scheme .
1778	The council 's Labour leadership , who have been in control since 1986 , have argued that they had no control over the transactions as the day to day running of the finance department is in the hands of expert financial staff .
1779	Publicly the banks have suggested that there could be dire consequences for the City should the deals be ruled illegal .
1780	They feel that as innocent parties they are being cheated .
1781	However , insiders reckon that the councils will get away with it if Hammersmith loses .
1782	While the banks may then try to sue the council or even individual officers the risk is very widely spread and no financial institution will be put in danger .
1783	City schools face cash cuts
1784	By SIMON MIDGLEY , Education Reporter
1785	HARD-PRESSED inner city comprehensive schools are likely to lose thousands of pounds a year under government plans to devolve financial management to heads , one of the largest teachers ' unions warns today .
1786	However , comprehensives in relatively affluent rural and suburban areas will become richer .
1787	A survey by the National Association of Schoolmasters/Union of Women Teachers reveals that under the new financing formula nearly 60 per cent of secondary schools will be less well funded and about 40 per cent better resourced .
1788	The study of 1,544 secondary schools in 43 local education authorities in England and Wales shows 882 schools will lose nearly £55m between them annually — an average of £62,663 .
1789	In particular , the survey suggests 71 per cent of secondary schools in metropolitan authorities will lose money and that the average cut in Liverpool , Manchester , Rochdale , Salford and Derbyshire will be more than £100,000 a school .
1790	Fred Smithies , union general secretary , said that the redistribution of resources would result from budgets being calculated according to total pupil numbers instead of classes taught .
1791	Budgets would also be calculated to meet average teaching costs — not reflecting actual staff salaries .
1792	‘ The school curriculum will be devastated , ’ Mr Smithies added .
1793	‘ Pupils ’ educational prospects will be blighted . ’
1794	Leaders of the Association of University Teachers , representing university lecturers , are recommending a claim which would mean a 27 per cent pay increase for its 30,100 members .
1795	The claim , drawn up by the national executive , will be discussed by a union council meeting on 14 October .
1796	A MORI poll commissioned by the Independent Schools Information Service , representing most private schools , suggests 57 per cent of Labour supporters do not want such schools abolished .
1797	A similar poll last year showed 52 per cent favoured retention .
1798	The poll , of nearly 2000 adults , showed 72 per cent favoured the retention of independent schools .
1799	Among trade union members 70 per cent were in favour , while 75 per cent of Green Party members opposed abolition .
1800	Teachers ready to walk out in ‘ oversize ’ classes protest
1801	By SIMON MIDGLEY , Education Reporter
1802	TEACHERS in east London are set to walk out of schools today if asked to take classes which they believe are too large .
1803	Members of the National Union of Teachers in Hackney and Tower Hamlets have voted , by a 95 per cent majority , to refuse to teach classes of more than 30 pupils .
1804	The limit for first-year infants classes will be 27 and for classes of children of mixed ages , 24 .
1805	The action will affect 107 schools but it is not clear how many have what the union regards as oversized classes .
1806	Shortages mean supply teachers are acting as permanent class teachers , leaving schools with no reserves to cover for sickness .
1807	When staff are absent , a class is split between other teachers .
1808	Hackney and Tower Hamlets are among the boroughs worst affected by shortages .
1809	Inner London as a whole has 653 primary teacher vacancies .
1810	Mike Loosley , general secretary of the Inner London Teachers ' Association - the area union branch — said yesterday : ‘ There 's no getting away from the fact that a child sent home on a particular day as a result of our action will be suffering .
1811	But our belief is that , in the long-term , we shall improve education because even this Government will see the need to pump in more money to get teachers . ’
1812	It is estimated that about 75 per cent of the union 's members in Hackney and Tower Hamlets voted in the ballot , supported officially by NUT national leaders .
1813	Embryo Bill to be used in fight against abortion
1814	By SARAH HELM , Home Affairs Correspondent
1815	‘ PRO-LIFE ’ campaigners pledged at the weekend to launch a ‘ make or break ’ drive to roll back the abortion laws .
1816	Experts on both sides of the debate believe the parliamentary campaign has the best chance of success since abortion was legalised in 1967 .
1817	Phyllis Bowman , national director of the Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child , told its annual conference at Keele that a dual attack on abortion and embryo experimentation will be launched in the autumn when the Government announces its Bill on embryo research .
1818	The society , which claims wide support in the Commons and the Lords , will campaign against embryo research and aim to introduce its own amendment to reduce the time limit for abortion to 18 weeks .
1819	The Government has indicated it will make provision in the Bill for such an amendment .
1820	That means it will be the first time abortion has been debated as part of government legislation , rather than on the basis of a private member 's Bill .
1821	As a result , the amendment can not be ‘ talked out ’ as has happened on every previous occasion , but will have to be resolved through a free vote .
1822	The society move was immediately condemned yesterday by the British Pregnancy Advisory Service as ‘ an attempt to hijack government legislation ’ .
1823	Diane Munday , for the service , said : ‘ Embryo experimentation and abortion are two different issues .
1824	This is another attempt to waste parliamentary time — already 280 hours has been wasted in this way in the past two decades . ’
1825	The society argues , however , that the announcement of the Bill itself is a success , showing how ‘ pro-lifers ’ have forced the Government to resolve the issue both on embryo research and abortion .
1826	‘ We have taken single issue campaigning beyond the text book by forcing the Government to take responsibility itself , ’ Ann Winterton , Conservative MP for Congleton and secretary of the all-party parliamentary Pro-Life Group , said .
1827	The society has started raising funds for the campaign .
1828	It estimates it will need about £200,000 and has been pledged £65,000 by the millionaire property developer Godfrey Bradman , chairman of the society 's Education Research Trust .
1829	Mrs Winterton said the campaign would be the most complex fought by the sociey because it linked the two issues .
1830	Some MPs and peers were in favour of one but not the other .
1831	In addition , the Bill would be introduced in the Lords first — and while the society had ‘ clout ’ with MPs , peers were less assailable , she said .
1832	Nevertheless , its members were all urged to target MPs and peers - particularly the ‘ waverers ’ — with letters and personalised press releases , issued at the conference .
1833	Mrs Winterton said letters should not be sent to the ‘ converted ’ who might find them an irritant , suggesting a change of tactics since the campaign over the Alton Bill .
1834	The Government 's Bill on embryo research comes after the report of the committee chaired by Baroness Warnock which recommended experiments on foetuses be allowed up to 14 days .
1835	There will be two alternative clauses - one calling for a ban on research and one for research to be allowed up to 14 days .
1836	The Bill will also set up a statutory licensing body to police experimentation .
1837	As well as campaigning for the first of the two alternatives , and for balanced representation on the licensing body , the society will introduce the abortion amendment .
1838	Phyllis Bowman said at the weekend that the best the society could hope for would be reducing the time limit to 18 weeks .
1839	The society claims , however , that recent votes show it has 3-1 support in the House of Lords and more in the Commons .
1840	Health authorities face cuts in beds and services
1841	By NICHOLAS TIMMINS , Health Services Correspondent
1842	HEALTH authorities look to be at risk of another round of bed closures , service cuts and deferred developments this winter , despite the fact that the year 's financial settlement for the NHS originally looked generous .
1843	In London , St Bartholomew 's Hospital has closed 75 beds to combat a threatened £2m overspend .
1844	Tower Hamlets health authority is considering action which may involve service cuts to tackle a feared £1.4m deficit .
1845	In King 's Lynn , Norfolk , 12 orthopaedic beds plus a small ward have closed and operating sessions are being reduced after a £238,000 overspend in the first five months of the financial year .
1846	In Kettering , Northamptonshire , new operating theatres which would have cost an extra £250,000 a year to open will stand unused until at least next April .
1847	Oxfordshire health authority has decided that a threatened £500,000 overspend means it can not open a new cardiology unit which would have freed beds for other uses .
1848	North-West Thames regional health authority has several districts with significant overspends , while South-East Thames is facing a potential £5m shortfall with many of its 15 districts ‘ walking a tightrope ’ .
1849	Districts in the region are already looking at deferring planned developments , extending Christmas ward closures and freezing staff appointments .
1850	Clive Minty , manager of Plymouth health authority and chairman of the NHS finance officers association , said the situation looked tight .
1851	‘ I would n't rule out the need for some extra cash for the service between now and the end of the financial year , although we have n't quite arrived at that stage yet . ’
1852	The scale of the financial problem is much smaller than in 1987 when nearly 4,000 beds were closed , triggering the NHS review and an emergency injection of £100m to keep the service going .
1853	But several senior finance officers said last week that between two and three dozen health authorities could face bed closures and service cuts in the next couple of months , with others deferring developments .
1854	Problems have arisen despite this year 's cash for the NHS appearing , when it was announced last November , to allow for real growth for the first time in years , even after taking into account inevitable pressures such as the rising number of elderly people .
1855	Since then , however , a whole range of staff from administrative and clerical , to senior managers , anciliaries and technicians have won pay rises above , and sometimes well above , the 5 per cent the NHS was given for inflation .
1856	Non-pay items such as drugs and equipment have been running above 7 per cent as inflation generally has risen .
1857	Cost-improvement programmes , which are meant to generate internal savings , are proving far harder to deliver , finance officers say .
1858	Appeals over the nurses ' regrading are coming through with no extra cash to pay for them , and , ironically , in the Thames regions the slump in house prices has slowed staff turnover ; vacancy levels , which helped balance the books at the cost of quality and volume of service , are lower .
1859	Water warning
1860	By NICHOLAS TIMMINS , Health Services Correspondent
1861	( First Edition ) Thousands of householders in the Pontnewydd area of Cmwbran in Gwent have been warned to boil their cooking and drinking water after vandals threw debris into a nearby reservoir during a break-in .
1862	Dearer letters
1863	By NICHOLAS TIMMINS , Health Services Correspondent
1864	The cost of first and second-class letters rises 1p today to 20p and 15p respectively .
1865	Composer 's visit
1866	By NICHOLAS TIMMINS , Health Services Correspondent
1867	Walter Kent , the American composer of The White Cliffs of Dover , visited the town for the first time yesterday and presented an original of the song manuscript to the district council , which will display it in the £14m ‘ White Cliffs Experience ’ due to open in 1991 .
1868	Oil spilled
1869	By NICHOLAS TIMMINS , Health Services Correspondent
1870	An emergency clean-up operation was launched last night after the MV Worthy spilled about 50 tonnes of oil during a delivery to the marine terminal of the Fawley oil refinery , Southampton .
1871	Bridge fall
1872	By NICHOLAS TIMMINS , Health Services Correspondent
1873	A man is recovering in Frenchay Hospital , Bristol , after falling from the Severn Bridge .
1874	Dean White , 23 , from Chepstow , Gwent , who suffered cracked ribs and bruising , was swept on to a mudbank in the dark and found by members of the Army Apprentice College at Chepstow , after coastguards with spotlights and a helicopter with heat-searching equipment had searched without success .
1875	Murderer escapes
1876	By NICHOLAS TIMMINS , Health Services Correspondent
1877	A convicted murderer was on the run last night .
1878	Richard Dennick , 22 , who was convicted at Chester Crown Court in 1983 , is thought to have used a blanket rope to escape from Lewes prison , East Sussex .
1879	He is described as 5ft 10ins , slimly built , with a fresh complexion and ginger hair , and should not be approached if sighted , police said .
1880	Gambling aid
1881	By NICHOLAS TIMMINS , Health Services Correspondent
1882	An organisation has been set up in Leicester to help the growing number of young people addicted to gambling .
1883	The UK Forum on Young People and Gambling aims to act as a co-ordination and information centre , and to provide counselling and advice to youngsters with gambling problems — mainly with fruit machines .
1884	Bus fracas
1885	By NICHOLAS TIMMINS , Health Services Correspondent
1886	A double-decker bus overturned in Dublin when fighting broke out among passengers .
1887	Twenty-four passengers were still being detained in two Dublin hospitals last night with fractures , and one with spinal injuries .
1888	New security measures , including video surveillance cameras , come into force on the city 's bus fleet this week .
1889	Kidnap hunt
1890	By NICHOLAS TIMMINS , Health Services Correspondent
1891	Police in the Irish Republic are searching for Damien Hulme , 40 , who was abducted from his home in Dundalk , Co Louth , by a gang wearing masks and carrying sledgehammers .
1892	The police suspect the IRA may be connected with the incident .
1893	Sixteen in court after drugs raid
1894	By NICHOLAS TIMMINS , Health Services Correspondent
1895	Sixteen people will appear before magistrates at Highgate , north London , today in connection with the police raid on the Broadwater Farm estate .
1896	The majority would face drugs charges , a Scotland Yard spokeswoman said .
1897	A further 22 arrested in the raid on Friday , and 51 detained on the Tottenham estate in the week leading up to it , had been charged and would appear in court at a later date .
1898	Yesterday , the police denied that drug dealers were tipped off before the operation .
1899	However , it emerged last night that a reporter from London Weekend Television unwittingly tipped off residents about the raid when he phoned contacts on the estate to ask if there had been a raid — before it had actually happened .
1900	Speelman facing classical opponent in chess contest
1901	By WILLIAM HARTSTON , Chess Correspondent
1902	This afternoon , at Sadler 's Wells theatre , he begins his attempt to progress to the final of the world chess championship candidates matches .
1903	His opponent will be the Dutch grandmaster Jan Timman , 37 , and their match may last three weeks .
1904	They will share the stage in the Pilkington Glass World Championship semi-finals with two Soviet grandmasters , Anatoly Karpov and Artur Yusupov .
1905	In a brief ceremony yesterday evening , Timman and Yusupov drew the white pieces for today 's opening games .
1906	While the officials , commentators and chess groupies then lingered over an enjoyable buffet , the players and their seconds rushed off to put the finishing touches to six months of preparations .
1907	The visiting players have been in England for some days , and all four are becoming understandable twitchy as the time to make the first moves approaches .
1908	Karpov is the best known of the contestants .
1909	World champion for 10 years between 1975 and 1985 , he has , since losing the title , been doggedly pursuing the man who took it from him , Garry Kasparov .
1910	Karpov is the only semi-finalist who appears relaxed and confident .
1911	While his delegation ( two grandmaster seconds and a doctor ) have stayed out of sight , performing their analytic labours , Karpov has attended receptions , even sometimes looking as though he is enjoying himself .
1912	His opponent , Artur Yusupov , 29 , looks worried .
1913	A raggedness around the edge of his thick , ginger beard seems a symptom of the nerve-fraying tension that surrounds a match of this importance .
1914	Tall and slightly stooped , Yusupov normally shows a shy good humour in his conversation , but he has looked increasingly serious these last few days .
1915	He brings to his games an intensity of concentration few can match , but he has always found Karpov a very difficult opponent .
1916	The match between Timman and Speelman has no clear favourite .
1917	Speelman has the reputation of being a very solid player with occasional flashes of mercurial originality and brilliance .
1918	Timman , 37 , is a more classical player , but inconsistent .
1919	While Speelman can be relied upon to finish just above half-way in any international event , Timman 's name frequently features either at the top or near the bottom .
1920	Over the next two weeks , each pair will contest eight games .
1921	If the score is tied at 4-4 , the match will go into overtime .
1922	At this level , eight games are too few to allow any margin for error ( in world championship matches , they play 24 ) .
1923	But with each loser taking home about £28,000 in prize money courtesy of Pilkington Glass , even the underdogs could afford to be a little more cheerful .
1924	as if deliberately to disconcert the semi-finalists , the world champion , Garry Kasparov , has registered one of his most impressive performances .
1925	With one round still to play in the Interpolis tournament in Tilburg , Holland , he is already sure of first place .
1926	Nine wins and four draws from thirteen games give him a score of 11 points , three points ahead of Viktor Korchnoi in second place .
1927	Such a huge margin of victory has rarely been seen in a tournament of this class .
1928	Runcie attack on ‘ Pharisees ’ revives rift with Tories
1929	By JAMES DALRYMPLE
1930	IN A RASPING attack on the ‘ Pharisees ’ of British society who decry the unsuccessful , the jobless and the poor , the Archbishop of Canterbury has returned to his attack on a decade of Conservative government .
1931	Dr Robert Runcie links drug and alcohol abuse , crime and vandalism , debt and family break-up with a section of the political and commercial leadership that says : ‘ We have made the people wealthy , it 's the Church 's job to make them good . ’
1932	In an interview in the magazine Director to be published this week , Dr Runcie denies that there are ‘ tensions and suspicions ’ between Lambeth Palace and 10 Downing Street , but he points out that the Church of England is active in parts of the country where the Conservative Party has little support .
1933	‘ This makes the church sensitive to the needs of those areas and that section of the population which has not benefited from the last 10 years of Conservative government , ’ he says , claiming that there is ‘ no automatic connection between wealth creation and a happy society ’ .
1934	He also says : ‘ Jesus reserved his most astringent criticism for the Pharisees .
1935	We tend to think that the Pharisees were unscrupulous , double-dealing , untrustworthy .
1936	That was not the case .
1937	Most of them led lives of exemplary moral rectitude .
1938	That did not cause them to escape the sharp edge of Jesus 's tongue .
1939	He disliked their self-righteousness and their judgemental attitudes .
1940	‘ Those are the real dangers in our society today .
1941	I sense they are both increasing .
1942	The successful are always tempted to regard their success as a sort of blessing or reward for righteousness .
1943	‘ This can lead to judgements being made about the unsuccessful , the unemployed , the poor and the unintelligent which are both uncharitable and untrue .
1944	‘ I 'm thinking of the sort of attitude that suggests the unemployed do too little to help themselves , that if only you have determination and drive you can get on in the world . ’
1945	He says there are positive factors in the new atmosphere between local authorities and private enterprise , but it ‘ hardly touches on the problems of poor housing , lack of amenities and the continuing unemployment ’ .
1946	‘ These problems are what lead to that sense of being left out , of isolation and despair , which in turn can lead to the symptoms we are familiar with — drug and alcohol abuse , crime and vandalism , debt and family break-up . ’
1947	A Downing Street spokesman said yesterday that ‘ there was absolutely no reaction at all ’ to Dr Runcie 's latest broadside .
1948	Ivor Stanbrook , MP for Orpington , who chairs the Conservative backbench constitutional affairs committee and is an Anglican , said : ‘ The ills of society are as much the responsibility of the Church as of political parties .
1949	The Archbishop should be thoroughly ashamed of himself at the failure of the efforts of the Church to create a better society .
1950	‘ Despite their differences , the philosophies of the two main political parties in Britain can be supported quite sincerely by Christians . ’
1951	Frank Field , Labour MP for Birkenhead and also an Anglican , said Dr Runcie was right to attack government polices but he should also direct his attention to the Church , which was ‘ self-righteousness on stilts ’ .
1952	Support came from one unlikely quarter , Peter Bottomley , the Northern Ireland minister .
1953	He said Dr Runcie was being attacked by people who had not read the article in its entirety .
1954	‘ What he actually says is a very proper reminder that you can do more good with wealth in the nation , in the community and in the family , but wealth for its own sake is not a good thing . ’
1955	Pharisee : ‘ One of an ancient Jewish sect distinguished by their strict observance of the traditional and written law , and by their pretensions to superior sanctity .
1956	A self-righteous person , a hypocrite ’ .
1957	Police attacked at acid house parties
1958	By JAMES DALRYMPLE
1959	SIXTEEN police officers were hurt , including seven sprayed with CS gas , and 51 people were arrested at an acid house party , police said yesterday .
1960	Drugs worth £2,000 , including LSD , ecstasy and cannabis , were seized .
1961	Thirty-three people were charged with drug offences , the other 18 with possessing offensive , weapons and offensive behaviour .
1962	The police were attacked as they tried to break up a crowd of about 10,000 people gathered in a field at Sidlow Bridge , near Reigate , Surrey .
1963	Roads were jammed with traffic .
1964	Supt John Hoyle said he and his 25 officers feared for their lives as about 100 guards and party organisers smashed their vehicles , let off the gas , and menanced them rottweiler and dobermann dogs .
1965	‘ I was forced to make a tactical withdrawal for the safety of myself and my officers .
1966	We had to allow the party to continue through the night . ’ .
1967	Reinforcements were called in from the Surrey , Kent , and Sussex forces .
1968	About 150 police moved in at daylight to make arrests .
1969	In Harlow , Essex , police arrested at least 45 people when they closed down an acid house party attended by 3,000 to 4,000 people at a disused warehouse at 6am yesterday , a police spokesman said .
1970	The arrests were for alleged public order , criminal damage or drugs offences .
1971	Tests were being carried out on suspected drugs thought to include heroin , ecstasy , cocaine , LSD and cannabis .
1972	Officers also found two hammers , two knives , a knuckleduster and three clubs .
1973	No one was charged .
1974	An acid house party attended by children as young as 12 was broken up by police yesterday .
1975	Cigarettes thought to contain cannabis , and illegally-sold alcoholic drinks were seized .
1976	About 500 people were at the party , in a barn at Elmstone Hardwicke near Cheltenham , Gloucestershire .
1977	Forty people are to appear in court in Blackpool today after Birmingham City supporters went on the rampage before and after their team 's Third Division match with Blackpool , wrecking a pub , smashing dozens of windows and bombarding police with bottles and glasses .
1978	Two policemen and about a dozen supporters were injured .
1979	Chance to damn Rushdie ‘ missed ’
1980	By NICHOLAS SCHOON
1981	BRITISH Muslims have missed a great opportunity to turn public opinion against Salman Rushdie , an Islamic scholar said yesterday .
1982	Ahmed Deedat told thousands of Muslims who filled the Albert Hall in central London that if they had only shown the non-Muslim majority that Mr Rushdie had grievously insulted the Queen , Margaret Thatcher and all white women in The Satanic Verses , then the author would have been condemned by all of society and the book banned .
1983	But Sheikh Deedat , who is based in South Africa , avoided a straight answer when asked if Mr Rushdie should be killed .
1984	His talk was peppered with quotations from The Satanic Verses , none of them put in context and almost all involving obscenities .
1985	The sheikh , a white-bearded man with the charisma of an American TV evangelist , is a specialist in the comparison of other faiths with Islam .
1986	His lecture tour will continue in five cities , ending in Birmingham on Sunday .
1987	‘ I would have been one with you in marches , burning books and so on , ’ he said .
1988	But being in Durban , far from the turmoil over the book 's publication , he had been able to read it and ponder .
1989	His conclusion was to turn the tables on those in the West who defended Mr Rushdie .
1990	The Satanic Verses referred to Mrs Thatcher as ‘ Maggie the bitch ’ .
1991	Worse still , the central character dreams of ‘ making tender love to the Monarch … she was the body of Britain , the avatar of the State ’ .
1992	If all British people did not feel deeply hurt by this ‘ there 's something wrong with you … ’
1993	Sheikh Deedat quoted one sentence which said white women were useful only for copulation .
1994	He linked public readings of the book in New York with the rape of a young , white woman jogger in Central Park by six blacks .
1995	Afterwards , Ali , 19 , from Luton , Bedfordshire , said he approved of the sheikh 's message .
1996	‘ I 'm a Muslim fundamentalist , but if I had a knife and I saw Rushdie I would n't kill him , I 'd talk to him .
1997	A lot of this is political .
1998	Plenty of those who talk about killing him would never do it themselves . ’
1999	Relaxation ‘ better than some drugs ’
2000	By LIZ HUNT , Medical Correspondent
2001	MANY of the four million people prescribed drugs for mild high blood pressure could take smaller doses or live without them by learning to relax , Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin says today .
2002	Breathing exercises , meditation , and deep muscle relaxation , or simply ‘ imagining pleasant experiences ’ can produce a significant fall in blood pressure .
2003	The Bulletin , which gives impartial advice on medicines to doctors , says more GPs and nurses should learn these skills to pass on to patients .
2004	People with mild high blood pressure are at a slightly increased risk of a stroke , heart attack , or heart failure .
2005	But the drugs that can reduce it have to be taken for life , and many have unpleasant side-effects .
2006	Patients have complained of impotence , skin rashes , dry eyes , nausea , vomiting , diarrhoea , fatigue or insomnia , and problems with circulation .
2007	But relaxation therapy is not an easy alternative , the Bulletin says .
2008	Patients must practise the techniques for up to 20 minutes a day .
2009	Further , large-scale studies are needed to confirm the encouraging results obtained so far .
2010	‘ It is a sad reflection on the financing of drug research that so much more is spent on the development of new and ‘ me too ’ drug therapies , ’ it adds .
2011	Clarke 's strategy set at secret talks
2012	By COLIN BROWN , Political Correspondent
2013	HEALTH MINISTERS met secretly at Chevening last week to agree a strategy for winning the propaganda battle over the Government 's NHS changes .
2014	The first step will come next week when Kenneth Clarke , Secretary of State for Health , uses the Conservative Party conference at Blackpool to reaffirm his commitment to changing the NHS and set out a justification for the forthcoming legislation .
2015	Mr Clarke is also keen to avoid further conflict with GPs .
2016	Although he will take urgent steps to impose a new contract , which they have rejected , he has told the doctors ' and dentists ' pay review body that he is prepared to tackle any problems arising in the first year .
2017	One source said : ‘ He gave an undertaking to the DDRB in his submission last week that we will monitor very closely the effects of the contract in the first year .
2018	If there are any problems in performance-related pay , we can iron these out .
2019	We are not saying it is fixed in concrete .
2020	We are saying it is the best we can do and we must judge how it is operating . ’
2021	Mr Clarke 's undertaking will be seen as a promise to provide more money , if it becomes necessary , in an effort to assuage the doctors ' concerns about the contract .
2022	New pay recommendations are due in the new year and , although Mr Clarke has told the review body that there must be pay restraint , ministers appear likely to press for the award to be met .
2023	The meeting at Chevening , the Kent home taken from Sir Geoffrey Howe and handed to his successor as Foreign Secretary , John Major , was also a stock-taking exercise .
2024	It took place after the BMA leadership agreed to call off its damaging campaign against cash restraint on GPs ' drug budgets , a move regarded by Mr Clarke as a ‘ breakthrough ’ in his efforts to win wider support .
2025	The Government is hoping the BMA 's acceptance of assurances that patients will not be denied drugs for cash reasons will also end allegations that doctors will not take the elderly and chronically sick on lists because they are too expensive to treat .
2026	Ministers say they have deliberately avoided ‘ sounding triumphal ’ about the BMA 's backdown to avoid rekindling the controversy .
2027	They are keenly aware the BMA leadership could come under attack from its rank and file .
2028	The BMA decision came with perfect timing for Mr Clarke , who was facing serious Conservative unrest at Blackpool about the presentation of health policies .
2029	He will lay an order in the Commons in a fortnight , immediately after the summer recess , to impose a new contract on GPs .
2030	He aims to have it debated and passed by next month .
2031	Ministerial sources confirmed the contract will be the ‘ same in every particular ’ as the deal reached with the BMA leadership which was rejected in a ballot by doctors .
2032	Ministers say Mr Clarke 's decision not to drop the concessions on targets for performance-related pay , given in talks with the BMA , and return to the tougher limits for higher pay underlines his determination to seek peace .
2033	However , it also reflects government recognition that health has become one of its most vulnerable policy areas .
2034	The Labour Party Conference : Policy review throws a spanner in the Whitehall machinery
2035	By COLIN HUGHES , Political Correspondent
2036	AN INCOMING Labour government would turn large areas of Whitehall upside down — but the party 's policy review barely considers the implications of its plans for restructuring government departments .
2037	Scattered through the policy review are proposals to : Drastically alter the status and organisation of the Department of Trade and Industry ; Create two departments — a Department of Consumer Affairs , and a Department for Legal Administration ; Create a Department of Environmental Protection within the existing Department of the Environment ; Set up a plethora of new commissions and executive agencies ; Set up a Women 's Ministry .
2038	Those are only the most overt changes advocated in the review papers .
2039	The only department which explicitly escapes unscathed is the one which Conservatives would most like to abolish : the Department of Energy .
2040	In virtually every case the aim of causing upheaval is explicitly declared , because Labour 's aim would be to upset the bureaucratic order it inherits .
2041	New departments and quangos would , according to the review , be designed to act as irritants and antagonists within the Civil Service system .
2042	But the policy review nowhere considers the overall effect of the individual changes proposed , or how they might be co-ordinated .
2043	Nor does it contemplate the knock-on consequences for Labour ministers of attempting to implement their programme while rebuilding the governmental machine .
2044	The ‘ medium term industrial strategy ’ which would form the centrepiece of Labour 's economic policy would , according to the Productive and Competitive Economy review group , be ‘ administered by a transformed Department of Trade and Industry ’ .
2045	The review adds : ‘ What we now seek is a DTI which will have an equal , if not superior status , to that of the Treasury . ’
2046	That approach would seek to knock out a keystone of Civil Service tradition .
2047	Labour policy has long sought to challenge the Treasury 's dominance in government .
2048	But its last effort — the Department of Economic Affairs , set up by Harold Wilson and headed by George Brown — ended in futile departmental and ministerial infighting .
2049	There would in addition be a minister for Science and Technology at the newly supreme DTI , with responsibility for determing investment in research .
2050	There is no mention in the education policy of how that might affect the Department of Education and Science .
2051	But while the DTI would override the Treasury , a new ‘ powerful Department of Consumer Affairs ’ would antagonise the DTI .
2052	It would be headed by ‘ a minister of Cabinet rank ’ and act as ‘ the consumers ’ voice with other government departments ' .
2053	Its remit for inter-departmental intrusion would be wide , with ‘ a watching brief over government action ’ and the ability to initiate consumer legislation .
2054	Only the Women 's Ministry would be given equal license .
2055	It would be able to ‘ require each government department to review its policies , practices , and existing and proposed legislation ’ .
2056	While new departments are born and others extended , one of the oldest — the Home Office — would become a shadow of its present self .
2057	Labour 's proposed Department for Legal Administration would take over responsibility for courts and tribunals ; court procedures ; organisation , training and appointment of the legal profession , magistracy and judiciary ; legal aid ; legal services ; and the Sentencing Council .
2058	That would leave the Home Office with policing , penal policy and the criminal law .
2059	Responsibility for the Sex Discrimination Act , the Equal Pay Act and the Equal Opportunities Commission would be given to the Women 's Ministry .
2060	The concept of a minister having Cabinet rank — and therefore implicitly not being a member of the Cabinet proper — crops up again on environment .
2061	A ‘ new Minister of Environmental Protection ’ would operate inside the DoE .
2062	That could work — though it is easy to imagine conflicts of interest with the housing and planning functions of the department .
2063	More problematic will be Labour 's plan for the Ministry of Agriculture , Fisheries and Food .
2064	‘ The priority of MAFF must become food , not farming , ’ the policy review says .
2065	‘ Its main concerns would become food and the people who consume it , not farming and those who produce it . ’
2066	But the regulatory functions over the food industry , now split between MAFF and the Department of Health , would transfer to a new Food Standards Agency .
2067	That is the first of many agencies , executives , commissions , and other quango-like bodies recommended by the review .
2068	In some cases Labour 's quangos merge existing ones , or replace well-established bodies .
2069	The funding of higher education would become the responsibility of one body , rather than two .
2070	Labour 's Quality Commission would replace the Audit Commission .
2071	But there would be new regulatory commissions and consumer councils for every utility , along with ombudsmen , and public interest commissioners appointed by the Secretary of State .
2072	There would be Skills UK — a locally structured training commission — a Fair Wages Commission , a Health Technology Commission , a Health Quality Commission , an Education Standards Council , an Independent Sentencing Council , a Children 's Commissioner , an Environmental Protection Executive , and a Social Insurance Fund administered by … ‘ an independent commission ’ .
2073	The Labour Party Conference : Cook appeals for Labour to accept electoral reform
2074	By COLIN HUGHES and COLIN BROWN
2075	AN IMPASSIONED appeal for Labour to back electoral reform was made by a leading Shadow Cabinet member yesterday after the national executive decided overwhelmingly to oppose a proportional representation motion .
2076	Robin Cook , a member of the national executive and the health spokesman , said that a Labour government which sought to force its programme on an unwilling nation would be unsocialist .
2077	He told a Labour Co-ordinating Committee rally that it was not enough for Labour to win the next election .
2078	It would also be necessary ‘ to smash the decrepit , effete constitution that allows a minority to capture power , and then use it ruthlessly in the interests of the privileged few ’ .
2079	Mr Cook argued that 10 years of Thatcherism had been forced on most people , who had never voted Conservative , and that many of those who opposed PR in the Labour Party wanted to use the same undemocratic power ‘ to ram socialism down the throats of a majority who did n't vote for it ’ .
2080	Advocates of the first-past-the-post system argued that it was the only way of delivering strong government , Mr Cook said .
2081	But after 10 years of Tory rule , he had had enough of that approach to politics .
2082	Labour would be acquiescing in a ‘ democratic outrage ’ if it continued arguing that , because the Conservatives had got away with being undemocratic for so long , it was now Labour 's turn .
2083	Mr Cook also countered the argument that PR would build in a pull towards the centre ground , preventing Labour from implementing a radical programme .
2084	It seemed strange to make that argument , Mr Cook said , when it was clear the whole policy review process was designed to placate the centre ground .
2085	‘ I can not honestly see that a system which would require us to compromise the morning after the election is really so morally inferior to a system which has already obliged us to compromise our policies two years before polling day . ’
2086	His speech , however , came aftera 24-4 vote in the national executive to oppose a proportional representation motion which will be debated on Thursday .
2087	The four were Mr Cook , Ken Livingstone , John Evans and Clare Short .
2088	Mr Livingstone said he was against pacts , but 10 years of Thatcherism had demonstrated the dangers of giving power to elites .
2089	However , Neil Kinnock , the Labour leader , and Roy Hattersley , his deputy , both opposed the motion .
2090	Mr Hattersley said giving disproportionate power to small , minority centre parties would not improve democracy .
2091	Mr Kinnock said it was wrong to propose a fundamental change in the voting system for a short-term tactical vote to get rid of the Thatcher Government .
2092	The only way to remove the Government was for Labour to win the next general election .
2093	Mr Kinnock intends to reinforce his conviction that Labour is in a position to win in his keynote speech tomorrow .
2094	Party organisers want the conference to show that the party is united as never before , leaving Mr Kinnock free for the first time to sell the policy package to voters without worrying about splits .
2095	There is expected to be a close vote on defence , but Mr Kinnock is confident the new policy will be affirmed today .
2096	The executive is recommending rejection of a motion calling for unilateral disarmament .
2097	It is also urging the conference to oppose a motion , supported by the National Union of Mineworkers , to commit a Labour government to abolishing all nuclear power within 15 years .
2098	There could also be controversy over the executive 's rejection of demands for the age of consent for homosexuals to be reduced to 16 years .
2099	The Labour Party Conference : Scargill may stand for Barnsley seat
2100	By COLIN HUGHES and COLIN BROWN
2101	ARTHUR SCARGILL , the miners ' president , refused yesterday to deny reports that he was to become a Labour MP .
2102	Mr Scargill is said by sources in the National Union of Mineworkers to be putting his name forward for the Barnsley West and Penistone constituency .
2103	The NUM leader — vice-chairman of the constituency party — said any such decision would have to be taken by the Yorkshire area of the NUM .
2104	Mr Scargill would seek to become an NUM-sponsored MP .
2105	The present Labour MP in Barnsley West , Allen McKay , is to retire before the next general election .
2106	Mr McKay had a majority of 14,191 at the 1987 election .
2107	Mr Scargill 's election to Parliament would acutely embarrass Mr Kinnock , but would pave the way for the NUM 's merger with the Transport and General Workers ' Union .
2108	TGWU members have said they would resist attempts to make Mr Scargill leader of a new energy section within their union .
2109	It is also possible that party members in Barnsley would prefer a more moderate candidate .
2110	The Labour Party Conference : Rough-edged voice of the grass roots
2111	By COLIN HUGHES
2112	JOHN PRESCOTT did not go to university , was never a television presenter , and finds it exceedingly difficult to complete a grammatically correct sentence .
2113	Those are three reasons why he will today be elected to Labour 's national executive , writes Colin Hughes .
2114	The other main reason is that , having been sidelined by Neil Kinnock last year into the job of transport , Mr Prescott has found himself appearing on the early-evening television and radio bulletins more often than any other member of the Shadow Cabinet .
2115	His brief has converted him into Labour 's chaos and disaster spokesman .
2116	From clogged skies to choked motorways , from Clapham Junction to the Marchioness , Mr Prescott has been Labour 's voice of protest on an issue that has moved to the heart of the ‘ quality of life ’ agenda increasingly dominating the political agenda .
2117	The former ferry steward , who rose through the National Union of Seaman before being elected MP for Hull , wears every thought and feeling on his sleeve .
2118	He is therefore easily riled or mocked .
2119	Nicholas Soames , the aristocratically toned and booming Tory MP for Crawley , can still make him stumble at the despatch box by muttering ‘ Another G and T , Giovanni ’ .
2120	Though he is neither intellectually sharp nor verbally articulate , Mr Prescott is intelligent in a self-schooled way , and speaks in a language that many Labour voters understand .
2121	The smooth style of Bryan Gould and the calm air of managerial competence conveyed by John Smith are deemed essential to make southern voters feel confident about the new Labour Party .
2122	Mr Prescott 's rough-edged style conveys a sense of honest indignation , where soothing strokes of eloquence might seem insincere .
2123	On top of that , he enjoys an unusually untainted popularity among activists and grass-roots trade unionists .
2124	Having devoted most of his political life to touring constituencies and union branches , he has barely needed to campaign for the constituency section of the executive over the past two months .
2125	When Mr Prescott first backed off standing against Roy Hattersley for the deputy leadership last year , and then changed his mind and decided to contest it after all , Neil Kinnock expressed unrestrained irritation .
2126	But the pair , openly hostile by the end of last year , will patch up their mutual differences .
2127	Mr Kinnock will want Mr Prescott 's national executive support — and may sometimes even need his constructive criticism .
2128	Mr Prescott is unquestionably closer to a large swathe of the rank and file than most other members of Labour 's Shadow Cabinet .
2129	Maybe it was for that reason that the party leader singled Mr Prescott 's past year performance out for praise in an interview in The Sunday Correspondent yesterday , calling him , chummily , ‘ Johnny ’ .
2130	All the signs , it seems , of an overnight rehabilitation .
2131	The Labour Party Conference : Conference condemned by activists as ‘ farce ’
2132	By STEPHEN GOODWIN
2133	AN ATTEMPT by party activists to empower the Labour conference to amend the leadership 's policy review was defeated with the aid of union block votes .
2134	Constituency party delegates declared the conference was being reduced to ‘ a rubber stamp ’ , a ‘ farce ’ and ‘ a mirror image ’ of the Conservative 's conference .
2135	But Larry Whitty , general secretary , said under party rules policy statements , such as the manifesto , were not amendable .
2136	Out of 10 speakers from the floor on two composite motions reaffirming the conference 's right to the final word on policy determination , only one backed the procedure adopted by the leadership for the review .
2137	Trade union delegates remained silent during the short debate but voted solidly behind the leadership .
2138	A composite requiring a separate vote where part of a policy document conflicted with a conference resolution was defeated by 4,921,000 votes to 1,057,000 .
2139	Les Huckfield , a former Labour minister , moving the composite on behalf of Co-operative Retail Services , said resolutions from the 1988 conference on social ownership , unilateralism and repealing anti-trade union legislation were ignored in the review .
2140	‘ We are talking about the right to behave as members of a democratic organisation and introduce amendments to our own fundamental policies .
2141	It is hypocritical that we praise Gorbachev and perestroika , praise what is happening in Poland and Hungary , when we ca n't even amend basic policy . ’
2142	A second composite instructing the National Executive Committee to treat conference resolutions as amendments to review documents was defeated by 3,704,000 to 2,245,000 .
2143	Moving it , Ken Slater , of Hyndburn , pointed out there were some 60 resolutions on the conference agenda endorsing existing party policy for unilateral nuclear disarmament .
2144	But if the review document , Britain in the World , was adopted those would be ignored .
2145	Florrie North , of Eltham , said , after 53 years as a party member , that ‘ it seems conference is being asked to rubber stamp policies made elsewhere ’ .
2146	Martin Smith , of Brighton Kemptown , protested : ‘ We want a Labour government , but that does not mean to say that we are going to meekly accept inadequate policies and an economic policy that is doomed to failure . ’
2147	Mr Whitty told delegates the NEC had given them ‘ adequate time to look at the reviews ’ .
2148	He said there would be a debate on reform of conference procedures and policy-making on Friday .
2149	The Labour Party Conference : Compromise over black sections set for defeat
2150	By BARRIE CLEMENT , Labour Editor
2151	NEIL KINNOCK 'S attempt to defuse the long-standing controversy over black sections looks set for a conference defeat .
2152	The three largest unions are refusing to vote for his compromise which would let whites belong to a black socialist society .
2153	The Transport and General Workers ' Union , which has the largest block vote ( 1.3m ) , is abstaining .
2154	The GMB general union and the Amalgamated Engineering Union , with 800,000 and 600,000 votes respectively , are casting theirs against .
2155	The decisions of the union delegations will probably mean a continuing wrangle .
2156	A hardline motion calling for black sections is almost certain to be thrown out on Friday and the party could be left without a policy as support for a proposition calling for societies with exclusively black members is also in doubt .
2157	Mr Kinnock 's compromise would have created one society , with a national executive seat if it attracted more then 3,000 members .
2158	The NEC adopted the plan by 21 votes to five .
2159	Bill Morris , deputy general secretary of the TGWU and the most influential black trade unionist , believes society membership should be restricted to representatives of ethnic minorities .
2160	Mr Kinnock and his deputy , Roy Hattersley , have consistently opposed exclusively black sections .
2161	The party 's campaign to win mass membership has failed , the GMB leader , conceded yesterday .
2162	John Edmonds , a confidant of Neil Kinnock , said the party needed to talk to potential members rather than rely on advertisements and mail shots .
2163	His union will spend £1.5m over the next two years in an attempt to increase individual membership .
2164	Membership dropped by 23,000 last year to 265,000 , although officials say additional members attracted this year has almost offset that loss .
2165	In 1952-53 membership peaked at a million .
2166	The Labour Party Conference : Left rejects appeals for unity
2167	By JOHN PIENAAR
2168	PROMINENT left-wingers yesterday rebuffed appeals for unity behind Labour 's policy review and accused the party leadership of a calculated effort to stifle grassroot dissent .
2169	Tony Benn , Ken Livingstone and Dennis Skinner , Labour chairman , joined in an attempt to rally opposition to the review at a pre-conference fringe meeting .
2170	As Labour leaders predicted a smooth ride for the policy overhaul this week , the three ‘ hard left ’ national executive committee members attacked the main elements of the package , from its abandonment of nuclear unilateralism to the shift away from all out renationalisation .
2171	Mr Benn told the Campaign for Labour Party Democracy rally : ‘ Now we have a leadership that claims the right to control the party entirely from the top .
2172	They aim to win by detaching the Labour Party as a whole . ’
2173	He cited the decision to deny local activists the chance to amend the review , the leadership 's refusal to restore all trade union immunities , the rejection of demands for all-black sections within the party and the strengthening of Shadow Cabinet power .
2174	‘ They are moving towards American politics .
2175	We shall have four-yearly conventions … you can drop your resolutions and buy balloons ; because that is all you will be able to release when you come to these conventions . ’
2176	He and Mr Skinner urged a future Labour government to give those not paying the poll tax an amnesty .
2177	And the party chairman derided the differences between Neil Kinnock and Bryan Gould , the trade and industry spokesman , on the value of water industry shares .
2178	‘ Let's tell them we are going to take them back without compensation . ’
2179	He added : ‘ The whole balance of the party is being moved away from the conference and the NEC to the Shadow Cabinet . ’
2180	Mr Livingstone urged Labour activists to strengthen the left wing faction in the NEC elections .
2181	The Labour Party Conference : Skinner cheered over water shares
2182	By JUDY JONES
2183	DENNIS SKINNER , the Labour Party chairman , won loud cheers from conference delegates yesterday when he demanded the return of water to public ownership without compensation to shareholders by the next Labour government .
2184	He also urged the party not to turn its back on traditional principles and values in its drive to agree an election-winning package of policies this week .
2185	In a speech that blended music-hall style with soap-box rhetoric , the veteran left wing MP for Bolsover , said : ‘ For too long the Labour Party has been trying to follow in the wake of Mrs Thatcher 's agenda .
2186	We have to escape from the time warp in which , unfortunately , some people are still caught after three election defeats in a row . ’
2187	Mr Skinner insisted : ‘ There will always be a need for socialism , whether in Britain or anywhere else , so long as there are millionaires living in the lap of luxury and other people living in cardboard boxes , so long as we have a system which allows the poor countries of the world to hand over $50m to the rich . ’
2188	He maintained there was only one way to resolve differences within the party leadership over Labour 's policy towards a privatised water industry : ‘ Take water back without compensation . ’
2189	However , Mr Skinner firmly supported Neil Kinnock 's rejection of electoral pacts with other parties to help to defeat the Tories .
2190	He portrayed the Tories as the party of worn-out ideas , led by a Cabinet of incompetents .
2191	More people had seen Sky television than John Major , the new Foreign Secretary .
2192	John Wakeham , the new Secretary of State for Energy , had risen to public prominence in his previous Cabinet job by refusing to have nuclear waste dumped in his constituency .
2193	Chris Patten , hailed the new ozone-friendly Secretary of State for Environment , had now been exposed as the ‘ dirty water salesman of Europe ’ .
2194	The Prime Minister had spent 10 years trying to destroy the human spirit in Britain , but ‘ she has failed because we in this movement are not going to allow her ’ .
2195	PUB ROCK / Pint-sized rock ‘ n ’ rollers : Jim White steps back in time to sample the fare at his local
2196	By JIM WHITE
2197	According to those on the inside track , Raggahouse is the latest fad in clubland .
2198	This hybrid mix of reggae and hip hop follows acid jazz , Belgian New Beat and acid swing — the wholly forgettable contribution of Jive Bunny — as the sound to set disco feet tapping .
2199	But no matter how often the archives are ransacked for old genres to bastardise , you do n't have to be at the forefront of style-making to foresee that very few clubs will be swaying this time next year to Pub Acid , Hip Malt ` n ’ Hops , or Sweaty Backroom House .
2200	The grunge and grime of pub rock has been credited with many things , including the invention of punk rock , but being remotely fashionable is n't one of them .
2201	At the Bull &amp; Gate , next door to the Town &amp; Country Club in London 's Kentish Town , the management has been promoting pub rock in a back room with adjoining outer bar for almost as long as the form has existed .
2202	Last Thursday night the pub presented a triple bill described in Time Out magazine , the Baedeker Guide for London pub rock fans , as ‘ melodic pop rock ’ .
2203	At the door the man taking the money was dirtying patrons ' hands with one of those rubber stamps no-one thought existed outside student discos .
2204	When pressed he was unable to give an accurate answer why this was necessary , nor why the stamp read ‘ Do Not Bend ’ .
2205	For your £3 entrance fee , you were invited into a dingey outer bar , packed to capacity with strange anarcho-punk types who only appear at night .
2206	At the bar a leather-clad schoolboy was buying a pint of lager , served in a plastic beaker .
2207	Occasionally , the decibel level would rise from the merely conversation-stopping to Heathrow proportions .
2208	This was when somebody opened the door to the inner sanctum where the support band was playing .
2209	Here , in a room even estate agents would have difficulty describing as anything other than small , 20 people clung to the perimeter walls as a man with a Chris Waddle haircut hammered out some old rock cliches .
2210	One fan sang along and plucked at an imaginary guitar , but he turned out to be the roadie .
2211	At the end of their set the roadie applauded wildly , and everyone else wandered back to the bar .
2212	No wonder the Waddle-alike kept his eyes firmly shut throughout .
2213	The headline band was called Girl With A Blue Guitar .
2214	They were what is known as indie-poppers , which means that they play guitars rather than synthesisers , wear black leather biker 's jackets and have a female lead singer with peroxide blonde hair .
2215	The twist here was that the guitarist was also female ( her guitar was blue ) and the singer had an Australian accent .
2216	The crowd had swollen to about 70 by now , standing in a respectful arc , as if the stage was protected by a sci-fi forcefield .
2217	A couple of girls danced enthusiastically and several others tapped their feet .
2218	A friend of the band weaved in and out of the crowd , recording their performance on a video camera .
2219	It was the only indication , apart from the price of the beer , that this was n't a decade ago .
2220	For the players , there was the prospect of returning to their day jobs with £50 in their pockets , for the landlord there was a healthy night 's takings and for the crowd , even those who had stayed in the bar all evening , there was a nasty ringing in the ears the next morning .
2221	That 's the thing about pub rock — everyone goes home happy .
2222	PUB ROCK / Pint-sized rock ‘ n ’ rollers : Jim White selects the best of the London pub venues and gigs in the weeks ahead
2223	By JIM WHITE
2224	GENERAL TIPS A general rule for pub rock patrons is that the quality of music will be in inverse proportion to the quality of the beer ( except at Finsbury Park 's Sir George Robey where an excellent music policy comes complete with a decent pint of Guinness ) .
2225	Another rule of thumb is that if the act is obliged to rest their microphone stand and amplifiers on beer crates instead of the stage , it will be a good evening .
2226	There are two types of pub rock occasions : those , like the one described above , where the band is likely to suffer from agrophobia ; and those where the pub is so crowded , death through asphixiation seems to be the only way to get out .
2227	There is no half-way house .
2228	If it 's a comfortable evening 's entertainment you 're after , stay at home with the video .
2229	Dress varies , but will never be up .
2230	WHO TO WATCH While the best that chart music can manage in the way of band names is Black Box , the pub circuit has always been ripe with imaginative handles .
2231	Cheerfully bending ears this week somewhere in London are Bald Howlin' Bastard , Daisy Chainsaw , The Wandering Crutchless , Benny Profane , The Gordon Jackson Five and New Fast Automatic Daffodils .
2232	We have no idea whether the music matches the nomenclature , but it must be worth £5 of anyone 's money to encourage them .
2233	PLAYING THIS WEEK TONIGHT Bop Brothers Blues Band The plethora of litigation surrounding Blues Brothers lookalikes almost matches that attached to the release of Wired , the unofficial biography of the original brother , John Belushi .
2234	Suffice to say , whether Boogie , Bop or simply Blues , this set of Brothers , whatever they once were before they fell out and dispatched solicitors to sue their siblings , will be wearing dark glasses , pork pie hats , black side-burns and will be playing Stax/Atlantic type material .
2235	Ca n't fail to be entertaining .
2236	Oh , all right it can .
2237	Weavers Arms , 98 Newington Green Rd , N1 ( 226 6911 ) 8.30pm £2 .
2238	Near Death Experience Hopefully simply a band name , not a prediction .
2239	Loud and tuneless , but has that ever been a problem before ?
2240	King 's Head Fulham ( details below ) 8pm £2 .
2241	Well Loaded Much talked-about guitar rockers , generally regarded as destined for the bigger stadia of life , unless they self-destruct en route .
2242	Catch them young .
2243	Powerhaus , at the Pied Bull 1 Liverpool Rd , N1 ( 837 3218 ) 7.30pm £3 .
2244	The Vapour Corporation Power pop , which means do n't expect to leave with your eardrums intact .
2245	Cricketers , Kennington Oval ( 735 3059 ) 8pm £3 .
2246	Johnny Mars Blues Band Unrepentant Smiths fans need not beat a path to the door , this is nothing to do with Johnny Marr .
2247	Dog &amp; Trumpet 38 Great Marlborough St , W1 ( 437 5559 ) 8pm Free .
2248	Primal Scream Not a name which would lead you to expect self-absorbed acoustic doodlings .
2249	Which is just as well , because long-haired rock is what you will get .
2250	Plough Kenton , Kenton Rd , Harrow ( 907 2498 ) 9pm £3.50 .
2251	FRIDAY Dr &amp; The Medics Silly hippies in Roy Wood cast-off costumes do n't sound like the most appetising evening out , and their brief foray into the charts was a considerable embarrassment , but the good Dr 's tongue is in the right place ( in his cheek ) and a jolly time is guaranteed .
2252	Powerhaus N1 ( 837 3218 ) 8.30pm £5 .
2253	MON 9 OCT Steve Marriott &amp; Mickey Hutton In among those on their way up , and those who will never go anywhere , the pub rock circuit plays host to those who were once really something .
2254	Marriott was the chirpy Cockney sparrer who lead The Small Faces , who performed that strange pigeon-toed shuffle on Top of the Pops and wrote ‘ Lazy Sunday Afternoon ’ .
2255	Now he steps out on beer-stained carpets and decaying floor-boards , but the conviction remains as strong .
2256	Best of all he seems to enjoy himself .
2257	Not , in truth , a pub rock venue , but certainly a pub rock act .
2258	The Monday Club , The Limelight , Shaftesbury Ave , W1 434 0572. 9pm .
2259	WHERE TO GO Bull &amp; Gate , 389 Kentish Town Rd , NW5 ( 485 5358 ) .
2260	Small but perfectly formed for pub rocking ( ie sweaty and restricted view from all but the front three rows ) .
2261	The front bar , if the noise level becomes too oppressive , has prints of Lester Piggott decorating the wall , and a pool table .
2262	Dog &amp; Dumpling , 13 Southgate Rd , N1 ( 359 6596 ) .
2263	Not sure of the music policy , but the name sounds like the ingredients of a takeaway from a less salubrious Chinese .
2264	Dublin Castle 94 Parkway , NW1 ( 485 1773 ) Beloved of Camden 's grunge rock enthusiasts , a temple to R'n'B , complete with priceless memorabilia decorating the brown-painted ( or nicotine-stained ) walls .
2265	Back room stage so small the performers have to rest their mike stands on the floor in front .
2266	Fulham Greyhound 175 Fulham Palace Rd , W6 ( 385 0526 ) Home of heavy rock , so take your ear-plugs .
2267	Consistently fine and determined music policy .
2268	Half Moon Putney 93 Lower Richmond Rd , SW15 ( 788 2387 ) Better known for its jazz , but a good , wholesome venue for rock nonetheless .
2269	King 's Head , Fulham 4 Fulham High St , SW6 ( 736 1413 ) L-shaped room , part corridor , part bar , part dance-floor , with the stage in one corner , ensuring restricted view from virtually everywhere .
2270	Perhaps the best atmosphere around , with uninhibited dancing and whelping .
2271	New Pegasus 109 Green Lanes , N16 ( 226 5930 ) Pub which has gone through several incarnations , most recently known as Chas'n'Dave 's .
2272	The odd policy to put the stage in the middle of the room rather than at one end leads to a diminishing of the atmosphere ( the corners are seldom filled ) .
2273	The stains on the carpet have survived every name change .
2274	Sir George Robey 240 Seven Sisters Rd N4 ( 263 4581 ) Named after an old musical hero , located opposite the old Rainbow , the venerable old rock institution which is now home to a religious sect .
2275	Lots of old posters on the wall .
2276	Smelly back room , perfect for the sweatier excesses of the form .
2277	ROCK / Wilko Johnson , pub rock king
2278	By JIM WHITE
2279	Wilko Johnson is , without reservation , the best performer in pub rock .
2280	The former Dr Feelgood and Blockhead , owner of chameleon eyes and a manic Chuck Berry-like duck waddle , now leads a fearsome three piece .
2281	Bassist Norman Watt Roy , who was the power behind Ian Dury and has a set of eye-baggage that must be the envy of Barry Norman , puts so much into thumping out a rhythm that the sweat drips from the end of his guitar .
2282	He takes his work-ethic from his leader who , rather than stop , has been known to replace broken guitar strings while hammering out a perfect twelve-bar blues riff .
2283	The music is that perfect staple of pub rock , good old Brit R'n'B , which was nurtured and cultivated in Wilko 's home-town of Southend .
2284	Never mind the band 's recent elevation to the £2,000-a-night world of the society ball circuit , the pub is the perfect forum to enjoy them .
2285	Back In The Night , the old Feelgood stomp , is the highlight and , usually , the closing number - though the number of encores varies according to how well the concert is going .
2286	Guaranteed the best fun you could have in a London pub , unless George Michael reformed Wham and chose the Fulham Greyhound to warm-up for their comeback world tour .
2287	Sat 7 October , Powerhaus , 1 Liverpool Rd , N1 ( 01-837 3218 ) .
2288	£5 .
2289	Ripping yarns and moral minefields : Allan and Janet Ahlberg talk to Celia Dodd about their bestsellers for children
2290	By CELIA DODD
2291	THESE days , no one questions the importance of good books for the under-fives .
2292	But books that appeal to adults too are just as important ; we are , after all , the ones who have to do the reading .
2293	There are few things worse than being bludgeoned into reading a book you hate .
2294	Story-reading should be one of the great joys of parenthood , a real meeting of adult and child minds .
2295	With the Ahlbergs ' books , it very often is .
2296	The husband-and-wife partnership behind such classics as The Jolly Postman , Burglar Bill and The Baby 's Catalogue win children over with ripping yarns and a wicked sense of humour .
2297	They win their parents over with a rose-tinted vision of the world which is decidedly reassuring .
2298	Their books are usually set nostalgically in the past — the Thirties and Forties are favourite periods — and often feature the perennial characters of fairy tales and nursery rhymes .
2299	Yet they are saved from sentimentality by the wry humour of both text and pictures .
2300	The Ahlbergs have been accused of not facing up to the harsh realities of life , of being too cosy and sweet , but their latest picture book , Bye Bye Baby , published today , breaks the mould .
2301	In it , a small child roams the streets , talking to strangers , until he finally goes off with a woman who has been wandering about pushing an empty pram .
2302	Curious subject matter for a children 's picture book , you might think , and hardly guaranteed to win the approval of the gimlet-eyed children 's book world .
2303	But the Ahlbergs have no time for literal interpretations of their work .
2304	How , they argue , would Alice , or The Wind in the Willows , stand up against such scrutiny ?
2305	The way to look at Bye Bye Baby , they insist , is as a ‘ light , surreal comedy ’ .
2306	‘ Certainly if you bring a literal interpretation to the story , it 's a minefield , ’ Allan Ahlberg says .
2307	Bye Bye Baby gets away with its particular minefield thanks to the sleight of illustrator Janet Ahlberg 's hand .
2308	The visual inspiration for the book was the famous advert for Start-rite shoes , showing a small boy and girl walking off down a tree-lined avenue — an innocent image if ever there was one .
2309	The Ahlberg version features a solitary figure .
2310	The advert gave the story its vaguely Thirties setting .
2311	The success of the Ahlbergs ' working relationship must have a lot to do with their long and happy marriage .
2312	In spite of apparently incompatible personalities — she is small and shy , he is large and does most of the talking — they have an empathy which is essential to the way they work , a persistent mutual pestering .
2313	The strength of the partnership is highlighted for Allan , who also works with a number of other artists .
2314	The time-consuming nature of Janet 's part in the process , combined with a bad back which prevents her spending more than a couple of hours at the drawing board every day , means she can not keep up with her husband 's prolific output .
2315	‘ With other illustrators , I work at a distance — we visit and phone , but there is a point at which I ca n't pester them any more , ’ Allan says .
2316	They see themselves not as author and illustrator , with separate roles , but as a partnership of ‘ book-makers ’ , contributing equally to the process .
2317	Allan Ahlberg says : ‘ In the past , a lot of children 's books seemed to be the work of talented illustrators whose pictures looked brilliant framed in a gallery , but when you tried to read the book , there was nothing there , because the words started as a coat-hanger to hang pictures on . ’
2318	Given the importance they place on the interrelationship of words and pictures , the couple 's working lives are surprisingly separate .
2319	They claim to see each other less than couples who go out to work , meeting for the occasional cup of coffee in the kitchen .
2320	Their 10-year-old daughter , Jessica , who is likely to be seen with her head buried in The Beano or a Roald Dahl novel , has provided the inspiration for many of her parents ' books .
2321	As a baby , she was fascinated by the Mothercare Catalogue , and so The Baby 's Catalogue , which documents the paraphernalia of the infant 's small world in minute detail , was born .
2322	Allan 's experience as a primary school teacher is another rich source of ideas .
2323	The couple still maintain close links with local schools , where they spend hours researching , sketching and absorbing jokes .
2324	After 10 years of teaching Allan had had enough .
2325	‘ I ran out of steam .
2326	It 's a killing job .
2327	Little kids eat you alive , they want so much physically and emotionally . ’
2328	Every year he would have half a dozen nine- and 10-year-olds in his class who could barely read .
2329	He treated reading as a team effort , getting them to read the Daily Mirror rather than the dull , babyish books on offer .
2330	These days , he writes the books intended to help children learn to read .
2331	‘ A lot of books used in schools are technically readable but rather drab stories .
2332	There 's no reason why they should n't be funny or gripping even if they do n't use many words . ’
2333	Writing books for children is becoming increasingly complex , as the arbiters of the modern child 's mores — librarians , teachers and publishers — lay down ever more stringent criteria .
2334	‘ The problem with children 's books increasingly is that there are armies of people who are properly concerned with , for example , the way girls were always discriminated against in the past , ’ says Allan .
2335	‘ That is bad , and must be thought about .
2336	But people seem to think that stories are written to a prescription , that you sit down and say , you do n't want it to be sexist , you do n't want it to be racist .
2337	In reality you just invent a tale , as if you were sitting round a fire in a cave . ’
2338	In fact anti-racism and anti-sexism seem to come naturally to the Ahlbergs .
2339	Their books are full of female breadwinners and New Men changing nappies and comforting bawling babies in the small hours .
2340	Although they are a principled pair — they once turned down the Smarties Award on moral grounds — the Ahlbergs reject the notion of children 's author as moralist .
2341	‘ I would say , just sit down and tell a good story , and to hell with the morality , ’ Allan Ahlberg declares .
2342	With that characteristically strong statement , he puts his finger on the secret of the Ahlbergs ' phenomenal success with adults and children alike .
2343	A manifesto for fashion from an idea by Lenin : Helen Womack on the stylish clothes being inspired by communism 's icons
2344	By HELEN WOMACK
2345	RUSSIANS are numb to the red of the Communist Party and the face of Lenin which has stared at them in public places for decades .
2346	Not surprisingly , they failed , with the first outbreak of Gorbymania , to see the fashion asset in the political imagery all around them .
2347	It was left to Western businessmen to manufacture CCCP T-shirts which ended up on the Soviet black market , an acute case of carrying coals to Newcastle .
2348	But one Moscow designer , at least , has been able to look at the familiar with a fresh eye and use the symbols of Soviet power with wit and imagination .
2349	Yelena Khudiakova 's exhibition of ‘ high fashion using imagery from behind the Iron Curtain' opens at the Birch and Conran gallery in London 's Soho today .
2350	Ms Khudiakova herself may , from time to time during the week of the show , model some of the 20 outfits — a red silk skirt patterned with the heads of workers who look as if they are marching when you walk in it , a red evening dress decorated with a swath of flowers reminiscent of the relief on a pavilion in Moscow 's Stalin-era Exhibition of Economic Achievements .
2351	The latter dress shows something of the influence of her education at the Moscow Institute of Architecture in the early Eighties : ‘ We studied sculpture , graphics and composition as well as architecture .
2352	It was a good grounding for an artist . ’
2353	Opportunities to be creative as an architect are limited , so many look for other artistic challenges , she explained .
2354	But her main inspiration is the post-revolutionary school of constructivist art .
2355	Her idol is the 1920s artist Varvara Stepanova , whose clothes designs she has reconstructed for museums and whose portrait , along with that of the revolutionary poet Mayakovsky , she has stitched on to another of her own red dresses .
2356	Developing the constructivist style , Ms Khudiakova , 31 , has created straight cotton dresses with cog-wheel patterns in primary colours .
2357	She has also designed black-and-white striped or chequered dresses , inspired by the shadows and dramatic diagonals in Eisenstein 's films .
2358	She modelled these under the chandeliers in the grand marble foyer of one of the seven Stalin-gothic skyscrapers in Moscow , which she describes as ‘ a perfect example of Soviet pokazukha ( window-dressing ) .
2359	The outside of the building is splendid , but the flats inside are cramped . ’
2360	Why is she fascinated by a style perfected under a dictator whose crimes the Soviet people are just beginning to understand ?
2361	‘ I know it is sometimes ugly and has bad political connotations .
2362	But it is special .
2363	You wo n't find it anywhere else in the world — the Moscow metro or the boards of honour ( hoardings where photos of model workers are displayed ) .
2364	I 'm trying to make it more beautiful and transform it into the language of clothes .
2365	‘ Ideology is one thing , but it is possible to enjoy a visual impression without thinking of history .
2366	Art is higher than politics . ’
2367	She is not a member of the Communist Party .
2368	A sense of humour redeems her designs from some of their associations .
2369	‘ Fashion is extravagant .
2370	You should enjoy yourself .
2371	This is not satire , but there is an element of a joke . ’
2372	She indicates a necklace made up of military insignia to illustrate her point .
2373	One can imagine a Soviet general fuming to see it around her neck .
2374	Her clothes are extravagant but not beyond the means of , say , Russian stars of stage and screen .
2375	The red silk skirt with workers ' heads and a gold top that goes with it , both cut from silk bought in Soviet Central Asia , would cost about 1,000 roubles ( the average Soviet wage is 200 roubles a month ) or £700 in London .
2376	Ms Khudiakova also provides sketches for Dom Modi , the state fashion house which mass produces clothes .
2377	‘ I design what pleases me and if customers like it that 's fine ’ .
2378	Asked what she thought of Slava Zaitsev , the man who has dressed rich Soviet women and diplomats ' wives since the Brezhnev era and the only Soviet fashion designer well known in the West , she curled up her nose .
2379	It seems Mr Zaitsev may be about to lose his monopoly on fame .
2380	The revolution the countryside needs : Christian Wolmar says Britain is lagging behind in setting up ‘ telecottages ’
2381	By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
2382	THE information technology revolution has left large swaths of rural Britain untouched .
2383	The only computers in many villages are those owned by the teenage boys of the affluent to play their wham-bam games .
2384	Ashley Dobbs , an engaging young entrepreneur , is setting out to change that by creating a nationwide network of ‘ telecottages ’ .
2385	This clever name , with its neat evocation of new and old , describes a concept which was developed in Sweden and is spreading to rural areas across the world .
2386	In Mr Dobbs 's words , a telecottage is ‘ a room in a village filled with computer communications that can be used by local people to learn and work ’ .
2387	The equipment consists of , perhaps , four word processors , a modem , a laser printer able to produce artwork-quality output , a fax and a photocopier .
2388	Software programmes for desk-top publishing , word processing , accounting and business planning are also essential .
2389	Mr Dobbs , who is chairman of Telecottages UK , warns possible users not to get bogged down with the technology : ‘ The equipment is a tool to overcome what needs to be done .
2390	People must n't think that because there 's a computer , they 've got to think of a use for it . ’
2391	He reckons there are no shortages of possible uses — farmers can use it to do their accounts , women with child-care responsibilities can work in their own time on the word processors , publicity material for local craftsmen can be produced and so on .
2392	This may sound utopian , but it has been borne out by the experience of existing telecottages .
2393	So far about 100 have been established , mainly in Scandinavia but also in Japan and several third world countries .
2394	As the network expands , so do the uses .
2395	The first was opened in the village of Vemdalen in the remote forests of Sweden in September 1985 .
2396	The impact , according to Henning Albrechsten , president of Telecottages International who has been involved in their development since the outset , was immediate .
2397	‘ By holding open meetings for children and having the telecottage above the local store , people of all walks of life came in - small-scale entrepreneurs and their spouses , shop assistants , craftspeople and children .
2398	Now , 15 per cent of the village regularly uses the telecottage and at least 20 per cent has taken courses there . ’
2399	Britain is lagging behind .
2400	No telecottages have been established , but there are several initiatives in the offing .
2401	The most advanced is a plan for five in the north of Scotland which will be funded by the Highlands and Islands Development Board and British Telecom .
2402	Colin Pavey of British Telecom hopes that they will be running by the end of the year .
2403	‘ Two would be business-orientated and three would be community-orientated and located in schools .
2404	We are most interested in the idea of networking , sharing skills such as translation and using them for distance learning . ’
2405	Telephone cables in the region are being upgraded to ensure they are capable of handling faxes .
2406	Mr Dobbs 's more unlikely allies are the Women 's Institutes .
2407	Most of the workers in telecottages and many of the users are women .
2408	He says : ‘ In villages there are many women with skills who are n't using them because of child-care problems .
2409	But they are interested in working .
2410	Users of telecottages are given the key and people can use them at any time , which means that women can come in during the evening , early in the morning or whatever . ’
2411	He is working on a scheme with the National Federation of WI to organise a competition to celebrate next year 's 75th anniversary by offering 10 telecottages as prizes for its 9,000 branches and he is hoping the WI will establish a pilot telecottage near its college in Denman , Oxfordshire .
2412	While telecottages should become self-financing once established , they do need initial subsidy .
2413	The cost of providing the start-up equipment is in the order of £10,000 and Mr Dobbs thinks space is not much of a problem : ‘ There 's usually the village hall or an empty shop . ’
2414	Henning Albrechsten reckons that it takes three years for a telecottage to be able to function without subsidy .
2415	In Scandinavia , with their mixed economies , money is always available , after a bit of persuasion , from both local and central government .
2416	In Britain , the tight financial regime imposed on local councils and the reluctance of central government to take on any new expenditure makes it necessary to seek funds from the private sector .
2417	The only government support so far has been a recommendation by the Rural Development Commission , part of the Department of the Environment , to establish a pilot scheme .
2418	Mr Dobbs sighs : ‘ This is a typically British bureaucratic response .
2419	It 's been proved elsewhere that they work .
2420	We do n't need pilots , we need telecottages . ’
2421	As for the private sector , while BT may be happy to provide pump priming for five telecottages in the north of Scotland , it is not about to bankroll a nationwide network .
2422	Nor , it seems , is anyone else .
2423	There is more at stake here than just bringing boxes of sophisticated equipment to remote areas .
2424	As Mr Dobbs , who runs a country house restoration business from his home in Micheldever , Hampshire , says : ‘ Villages are good places to live and work .
2425	The village is a fantastic institution and they make people happier . ’
2426	But the villages are dying , becoming suburbs or dormitories where few people work but many sleep .
2427	Employment in agriculture , still the main rural industry , fell from over a million in the mid-Sixties to under 100,000 now .
2428	The aim of telecottages is to create well-paid , flexible employment which will provide new jobs and make existing rural industries more competitive .
2429	The emphasis on high wages is important .
2430	Villages are expensive to live in and if they are to become vibrant communities again , local people must be able to earn enough to be able to continue living in them .
2431	There is a wider impact , too .
2432	The abstract talk of commuting by rail or road being replaced by information technology finds a concrete expression in the idea of telecottages .
2433	Once people overcome their fears about computers and begin to use them in telecottages , they acquire their own equipment .
2434	Many may eventually be able to work from home rather than commute to an office .
2435	Henning Albrechsten says : ‘ Modern information technology has given people in remote regions the opportunity to overcome their worst handicap ; their distance from the centres of learning and development . ’
2436	He sees them as not only strengthening small communities , but also as actually beginning to reverse the population flows from the countryside to the towns .
2437	Britain , with its growing traffic problems , seems an ideal place for the onset of this revolution .
2438	Despite Mr Dobbs 's tireless efforts , this is another revolution which Britain is likely to be viewing from the sidelines .
2439	The busy sex life of the nice male : Chris Barnard explains why patting children on the head could help a man curry favour with their mother
2440	By CHRIS BARNARD
2441	I REMEMBER once seeing a small girl remove a tin of soup from halfway down a display stack in a supermarket .
2442	The predictable , and very satisfying , result attracted the attention of a nearby assistant , who strode towards the offending infant with an expression of undisguised anger on her face .
2443	Suddenly she caught sight of the child 's mother .
2444	Immediately , her expression and pace of approach changed and instead of the lambasting , or worse , she had seemed about to deliver , she gave the child a tolerant smile and began to pick up the scattered cans .
2445	Most of us have experienced similar examples of such ‘ audience effects ’ on behaviour : playing a game to perfection ( or otherwise ) when the team selector is present , for instance .
2446	What you do depends very much on who might be watching , often with good reason .
2447	Prudently taking cognisance of onlookers also turns out to be important in the social behaviour of other primates .
2448	Frans de Waal , in his book Chimpanzee Politics , relates a number of instances among groups of captive chimps .
2449	One of the most striking concerned a male called Yeroen which was hurt in a fight with another male , Nikkie .
2450	For nearly a week after the injury , whenever he was in Nikkie 's field of view , Yeroen would hobble pitifully , generating an air of pain and dejection .
2451	As soon as he moved out of Nikkie 's view , however , his demeanour changed and he walked normally without discomfort .
2452	What Yeroen hoped to gain by his play-acting is not clear , though it may have helped to defuse further aggression .
2453	What is clear is that his behaviour was geared to the available audience .
2454	Some recent work on green vervet monkeys shows that audience effects can be important in other contexts in which their functional significance is a little easier to identify .
2455	Anne Keddy Hector , Robert Seyfarth and Michael Raleigh at the Universities of California and Pennsylvania have been studying parental behaviour among captive vervets to see if males ' parental ability affected the females ' choice of mate .
2456	Their argument was that a male 's potential quality as a parent might be important because , in many species of Old World monkeys , males form strong protective relationships with females and their young , which are crucial in reducing the amount of harassment and competition the young suffer from other members of the group .
2457	In a number of species , bonds between males and infants within a group may influence the chances of males mating with certain females .
2458	In baboons and Japanese macaques mothers resuming their sexual cycle are more likely to mate with males who have formed a relationship with their offspring .
2459	Demonstrating parental behaviour towards infants may be a ruse by which low-ranking males are able to gain mating opportunities .
2460	If this is true , then males should respond differently towards an infant depending on whether or not its mother is arou.d to be impressed .
2461	Keddy Hector , Seyfarth and Raleigh tested this in an ingenious experiment .
2462	They looked at the behaviour of a male and infant under one of three conditions .
2463	In one , the infant 's mother was placed behind a clear screen so that the male and infant could see her and she could see them .
2464	In a second , the screen was replaced with a one-way mirror so that the mother could see the interacting pair but could not herself be seen .
2465	In the final condition , the mother was hidden behind a metal screen so that she could neither see nor be seen by the pair in the observation room .
2466	After half an hour in each case , the mother was released to join her infant and the accompanying male .
2467	The experiment revealed a complex interaction between male and female dominance rank and visibility of the mother in determining male responses to infants and female behaviour towards males .
2468	Males of all dominance classes ( alpha , subordinate and newly introduced ) were less aggressive towards infants when the mother was in sight .
2469	Alpha males were consistently friendlier than others towards male infants but were particularly nice if there was a chance that the infant was their own .
2470	Subordinate males , on the other hand , were friendlier towards the infants of high-ranking females , perhaps because their own rank might increase if they managed to associate themselves with such females .
2471	They were also friendlier towards female infants and those not fathered by the current alpha male .
2472	Newly introduced males were the least friendly to infants .
2473	If being nice to infants is a way of currying favour with females , the benefits ought to be discernible in the way males were treated once the observer females were let loose .
2474	This seemed to be the case .
2475	Overall , females were friendliest and least aggressive towards alpha males , regardless of their treatment of infants .
2476	Since females reap substantial protective benefits from associating with alpha males , this is perhaps not surprising .
2477	When it came to subordinate males , however , there was a strong relationship between how nice males had been to infants and how likely they were to be attacked by the female : nicer males fared better .
2478	In the one-way mirror treatment , when males were unaware they were being watched , they were more aggressive towards infants than in the clear screen treatment and as a result they received a drubbing from the female .
2479	The experiment thus suggests that while alpha males can trade on their superior competitive ability to obtain mates , subordinates may have to wheedle their way into favour .
2480	Judiciously patting junior on the head when mum is watching may be a useful way of doing it .
2481	Dr Chris Barnard works in the Department of Zoology at Nottingham University .
2482	Cool solutions for hot climates : David Spark looks at tropical temperature controls for vaccines
2483	By DAVID SPARK
2484	WHEN smallpox was wiped out by a campaign led by the World Health Organisation , the campaigners were fortunate in that smallpox vaccine remains effective even when stored at relatively uncontrolled temperatures .
2485	Vaccines against measles , polio , whooping cough and other killing infections prevalent in the third world are much more sensitive , however .
2486	On behalf of WHO and Unicef , the Consumer Research Laboratory ( CRL ) at Harpenden , Herts , has set up a special facility to test the equipment used to carry and store vaccines .
2487	CRL is allocating the equivalent of one person working full-time to the programme .
2488	The CRL 's main task is testing products for the Consumers ' Association , publisher of Which ? magazine .
2489	Since 1978 , it has also tested equipment used in the ‘ cold chain' — the succession of insulated containers which ensures that vaccines and other sensitive materials reach their destinations , often isolated villages without electricity , in good condition , on which WHO 's immunisation campaign depends .
2490	In 1983 , CRL helped to set up a test facility at the University of Cali in Colombia .
2491	With more equipment coming on the market , WHO decided that Cali should concentrate on long-term research and that a full-time test facility was needed in Europe .
2492	Other laboratories test particular products , but CRL is probably the only one which can cover the full range of equipment needed in the cold chain .
2493	The range is wide .
2494	Manufacturers dispatch vials of vaccine — along with frozen carbon dioxide for cooling — in large , insulated cartons which must be tested for both strength and the efficiency of the insulation .
2495	From the cartons , the vials are unloaded into freezers and refrigerators .
2496	The Harpenden test facility will show how these stand up to the high temperatures of the tropics .
2497	Thermocouples at critical points in each fridge or other piece of equipment will show , through a computer print-out , how the temperature varies inside it .
2498	Other items on test include the cold boxes in which vaccines are carried to villages , sterilisers for the syringes , stoves for the sterilisers and thermometers .
2499	The outcome of the tests is to be a book of approved equipment , with details of performance , published by WHO and Unicef .
2500	An obvious snag is the power cuts which are common in third world countries .
2501	The CRL tackled this problem a few years ago , developing ice-lined refrigerators : tubes of water surrounding the fridge compartment freeze ; if the power fails , the tubes keep the vaccines cool until all the ice has melted .
2502	Designs are now being considered for small ice-lined cabinets for doctors ’ surgeries , so that doctors can have vaccines at hand to immunise any child who comes for treatment .
2503	A drop in voltage can be more serious than a power cut .
2504	Below a given voltage , the compressor in a refrigerator burns itself out .
2505	So there must be a voltage control unit to cut the power supply if the voltage fails , and these units must also be tested .
2506	Ken Mills , manager of external projects at Harpenden , says that in some developing countries the control units themselves were blowing up .
2507	It was thought that people tapping into the power supply illegally were sending high-voltage ‘ spikes ’ down the line .
2508	So control units must be designed to withstand these spikes .
2509	‘ We have to create the spikes here , to see how the units withstand them , ’ he says .
2510	Last year , WHO presented CRL with another problem : disposing of used syringes .
2511	‘ You ca n't just dig a hole and bury them .
2512	After use , the needles can be infected .
2513	Kids dig them up and can scratch themselves . ’
2514	CRL worked with a box-maker , Cundell Decorprint of Somercotes , Derbyshire , who produced a box in which discarded plastic syringes can be burned .
2515	The box had to be flat-packed but assembled without glue ; it had to be portable and reasonably waterproof .
2516	When the box is full , you drop in a burning match .
2517	The plastic of the syringes catches fire and the fire kills any infection on the needles .
2518	Science and Technology Viewpoint : Checks for man-made genetic time bombs
2519	By TOM WILKIE
2520	PLUTONIUM , more than any other element in the periodic table , is capable of arousing strong public emotion , bordering at times on hysterical fear and loathing .
2521	Yet plutonium has been intensively studied , is well understood , and it decays away into harmlessness with a half-life of about 240,000 years .
2522	Consider instead , living creatures .
2523	They interact with the natural world in complex , ill-understood ways — ecology is the youngest science .
2524	Individuals may die , but plants , animals , and micro-organisms , are capable of reproducing and increasing their numbers .
2525	It is surprising therefore , that there has been so little public interest in this country in proposals to release into the environment living , man-made creatures .
2526	Genetic engineering has reached a point of such sophistication that there are clear benefits to be gained by releasing from the laboratory living organisms upon which have been conferred characteristics they could never have acquired through the normal processes of evolution or selective breeding .
2527	For example , it is possible to snip through the genes of the vaccinia viruses ( one of which is the basis for the vaccine against smallpox ) and stitch in some threads of DNA from the rabies virus .
2528	To the immune systems of the animals that it may infect , the resultant mutant virus will look as if it is rabies and so will trigger antibodies and generally stimulate immunity against the disease .
2529	But because the virus is ‘ really ’ vaccinia , the infected animal will suffer none of the ill-effects of rabies while becoming proof against infection by any ‘ real ’ rabies virus .
2530	We stand to derive immense benefits from such releases of genetically engineered organisms into the environment — providing they do what we expect them to .
2531	But there is a risk .
2532	What if , by some unforeseen mischance , the vaccinia-rabies hybrid turned into an organism that actually spread rabies - a disease that has always been comparatively difficult to catch — with smallpox-like contagion ?
2533	This scenario is unlikely in the extreme .
2534	But research over the past 40 years or so has revealed some great surprises in the natural world .
2535	Genes - for resistance to antibiotics , for example — can be swapped between micro-organisms of completely different species naturally , in the wild .
2536	There are almost certainly other surprises out there which , by definition , we can not speak about today .
2537	We must try to ensure that , as a result of our own genetic manipulation , they do not turn out to be unpleasant surprises .
2538	So the civil servants in the Department of the Environment are to be congratulated .
2539	They have recognised that the laws to protect our environment need to be extended and revised to cope with the situation genetic engineering presents .
2540	They have , sensibly , realised that the benefits from proceeding with caution outweigh the risks and there is no case for banning the practice outright .
2541	They have recommended that anyone who intends to release a genetically manipulated organism into the environment should first seek consent of some ‘ competent authority ’ which must be satisfied that the proposed release is as safe as reasonably practicable .
2542	Release without consent will be a crime , regardless of the innocuousness or otherwise of the organism .
2543	So far , so good .
2544	But the civil servants have been vague when it comes to the detail of who is to be the competent authority , who is to foot the bill for its work ( and any extra studies it may require before giving consent ) , and how much of its deliberations are to be made public .
2545	Moreover , it seems as if the Thatcherite revolution has still not penetrated the dark towers of Marsham Street .
2546	For there is no mention of how capitalism or the consumer can play their proper roles in determining the future of genetic engineering .
2547	This is a serious omission , redolent of the old habits of thought that if only the public will trust Whitehall , all will be well .
2548	One of the first commercial products to derive from this biotechnology is likely to be genetically engineered tomatoes .
2549	By manipulation of the tomato 's genetic blueprint , scientists can alter the rate at which it ripens .
2550	This reduces the wastage due to damage in the journey from greenhouse to supermarket shelf .
2551	There is a dual benefit to the consumer : because there is less wastage , the genetically engineered tomatoes ought to be cheaper ; and they ought to taste better too .
2552	Well then .
2553	Let the consumer make the choice .
2554	Let us make sure that the law to be put before Parliament this autumn requires genetically engineered products to be clearly labelled as such .
2555	All the submissions to the Government from the biotechnology industry have called for greater public information about genetic engineering , so no one can object to giving consumers the chance to make informed choices as they push their supermarket trolleys .
2556	It is also right that consumers should pay the full price of the advantages they will enjoy as a result of genetic engineering .
2557	The market has a mechanism for ensuring even that the potential risk of damage to the environment can be costed .
2558	It is called insurance .
2559	Before the ‘ competent authority ’ sanctions any release into the environment it should stipulate that the releaser has to take out an insurance policy that will cover it for any consequential damage to the environment and necessary clean-up operations .
2560	The cost of the premiums would , of course , be passed on to consumers in the price of the products .
2561	After all , I am not allowed to drive a motor car without having proved my ability to a ‘ competent authority ’ — the driving test examiner .
2562	But once I have passed my test , I am not allowed out on the road without insurance .
2563	If such stipulations are made for so mundane a practice as motoring , they would seem to be reasonable precautions for protecting our environment for the rest of time from possible damage by man-made creatures .
2564	How hot summers brought us stripped pines : Scientists now believe a dramatic loss of conifer needles which struck West German forests may have been caused by the weather , rather than pollution .
2565	Martyn Kelly reports
2566	By MARTYN KELLY
2567	IN THE mid-1980s press stories about coniferous trees in German forests losing their needles were at their peak .
2568	Half a decade on , global warming has become the biggest environment story .
2569	However , the cause of tree blight has remained the subject of intense speculation , being variously attributed to ‘ acid rain' , ozone , a mystery disease , or any combination of these .
2570	But now scientists believe the root cause of Germany 's problems could simply be drier weather , albeit aggravated by acid deposition and by the growing tendency for forests , like farmland , to be planted as monocultures .
2571	In German forests , there was a consistent pattern of damage to Norway spruce , the main species affected , beginning with a yellowing of the upper surface of older needles and progressing to the death of the needle and a marked thinning of the crown of the tree as dead needles dropped off .
2572	The colour change from green to yellow suggested that the key may lie in chlorophyll , the compound responsible for photosynthesis .
2573	They followed this up to show that affected leaves had lower concentrations of magnesium , an important part of the chlorophyll molecule .
2574	The disease theory was discounted early on by Reinhart Huttl of the University of Freiburg , who grafted affected shoots on to otherwise healthy trees .
2575	The mystery virus , it was thought , would spread into the healthy tree , causing that too to become diseased .
2576	In fact , the opposite was the case ; the grafts became green .
2577	If disease was not responsible , then perhaps the answer lay with a physical cause such as air pollution .
2578	There were two contenders for this : acid deposition ( in all its various forms ) and ozone .
2579	Bernard Ulrich and colleagues at the University of Gottingen had proposed that deposition of sulphur and nitrogen compounds ( originating from industrial activity and power generation ) led to the release of aluminium from minerals in the soil .
2580	This , in turn , was toxic to the tree roots responsible for uptake of nutrients such as magnesium .
2581	Meanwhile , in laboratories in Essen , Bernard Prinz was suggesting that forest decline was caused by damage to foliage by ozone , another gas produced as a by-product of industry .
2582	However , Siegfried Fink , a colleague of Huttl at Freiburg , found that needles exhibiting the symptoms of forest decline showed changes initially in the vascular cells of needles , which transport nutrients from the roots .
2583	From here , damage spread to the cells responsible for photosynthesis .
2584	A needle exposed to gaseous pollutants such as ozone , on the other hand , showed signs of damage first in the more exposed photosynthetic cells and only later in the better-protected vascular tissues .
2585	Scientists working for Britain 's Central Electricity Generating Board also found flaws in the experimental techniques used by Prinz and his colleagues .
2586	The Germans used a machine which converted oxygen in air into the ozone which they used for their experiments .
2587	However , Drs Keith Brown and Mike Roberts found that nitric acid was produced from atmospheric nitrogen at the same time and that this was responsible for most of the damage .
2588	When they repeated their experiment with ozone produced from pure oxygen they found very little effect .
2589	Mike Roberts and colleagues at the CEGB 's research laboratories now think that air pollution plays only a minor role after all ( Forestry , vol 62 , pp 179-222 ) .
2590	They agree that yellowing needles are caused by magnesium deficiency .
2591	However , they are not convinced that the primary cause of this is toxic concentrations of aluminium released into the soil as acidity increased .
2592	Instead they see low concentrations of magnesium as a natural phenomenon exacerbated by air pollution .
2593	The prime cause , they believe , was a succession of dry summers in the mid-1970s .
2594	Drought resulted in decreased root growth and slower breakdown of soil litter , an important source of magnesium for forest trees .
2595	A further factor complicating the story is the trend towards monoculture of timber trees such as spruce .
2596	This increases soil acidity , and encourages trees to form shallow roots , which are less efficient and more prone to the effects of drought .
2597	It was a slowing down of the spread of forest decline in the late 1980s that first pointed the CEGB scientists towards climate as the cause .
2598	In 1984 , foresters found that 20 per cent of the Norway spruce in West Germany 's forests had lost more than a quarter of their needles .
2599	By 1988 this had dropped to about 15 per cent of spruce , and other species such as pine and fir showed similar improvements .
2600	In other words , the symptoms were at their worst during the hot , dry summers of the early Eighties and started to improve in subsequent wet summers .
2601	It is , cynics might say , exactly the conclusion one would expect from scientists in the pay of the CEGB .
2602	However , Mike Roberts , now director of the Natural Environment Research Council 's Institute of Terrestrial Ecology ( South ) , is quick to point out that acid deposition does exacerbate the problem , in particular by washing magnesium from an already nutrient-poor soil .
2603	Deposition of nitric acid in particular may contribute to the equation as a fertiliser as well as a pollutant per se .
2604	This is because the increased supply of nitrogen may encourage tree growth at a faster rate than the amount of magnesium in the soil can support .
2605	The mechanism which Roberts proposes might be expected to work anywhere that spruce is grown .
2606	However , forest decline was far more extensive in Germany and continental Europe than , for example , in Britain and Norway .
2607	This he attributes to our oceanic climate .
2608	Proximity to the Atlantic means rainfall in Britain contains quite a lot of dissolved salts from the sea .
2609	So although the wet climate in the west of Britain causes more magnesium to be washed from the soil than in Germany , this amount is far less than that added to the soil each year from rainfall .
2610	The conundrums surrounding forest decline were many .
2611	Why was it so regional in character ?
2612	Why did pollution-sensitive lichens survive on affected trees ?
2613	Demonstrating climate to be the primary cause clears up many such problems .
2614	At the same time , it gives foresters and the power industry a much clearer picture of how their activities are affecting the trees .
2615	Ironically , Mike Roberts is one person who welcomed the drought earlier this summer .
2616	The extra stress that it will have caused to forest trees in Britain and the continent will provide one of the first tests of his new ideas .
2617	Cricket First Test : Azharuddin 's daring defiance
2618	AS anti-climaxes go , they do not come better than this .
2619	As history , nothing that happened here yesterday was ever likely to match the events of Friday , but as entertainers , the Indian batsmen generally hold their own .
2620	They are still 277 behind England and only 43 ahead of Graham Gooch , but for exhilarating strokeplay , the honours are all with the Indian captain , Mohammed Azharuddin .
2621	The unchallenged winner of the wooden spoon after putting England in on Thursday , he bounced back yesterday with an innings of magnificent irresponsibility .
2622	He reached three figures , for the fourth time against England , in only 130 minutes and 87 balls .
2623	It was the fastest hundred in a Test match in England since the heady days of 1981 , and as a gambler 's last throw , it was in the same class as Botham 's 149 .
2624	In three innings against England this summer , he has yet to be out .
2625	Not that Gooch was finished .
2626	Four years ago , when Ian Botham returned from suspension and took a wicket with his first ball , Gooch trotted up from slip and asked him , ‘ Who writes your scripts ? ’
2627	Whoever it was , Gooch seems to have hired them .
2628	Yesterday , not content with turning England into a winning team and making the highest Test score of the modern era , he threw himself the ball — and removed the dangerous Sanjay Manjrekar with his third delivery .
2629	The next wicket to fall was that of Ravi Shastri : Gooch caught him .
2630	At pounds 150 , the fee paid to the man-of-the-match adjudicator , Ray Illingworth , will work out at about pounds 300 per second 's thought .
2631	Unless , that is , Azharuddin gets another 217 tomorrow .
2632	India had resumed at 48 for no wicket , needing another 406 to avoid the follow-on .
2633	Shastri and Navjot Sidhu continued to enjoy both good fortune and the spaces which Gooch 's attacking field left open .
2634	Devon Malcolm and Angus Fraser opened the bowling and both started as they were to go on .
2635	Malcolm 's first ball was cut for four by Sidhu .
2636	Fraser 's first ball beat Sidhu outside off-stump ; his second , angled in , was worth a shout for lbw .
2637	The disappointing slowness of the pitch allowed both openers to play Malcolm off the back foot , and therefore to drive his attempted yorkers .
2638	He has two kinds of Test performance — five for very few , and none for a lot , and this was looking like the latter .
2639	But Fraser , steady as ever after missing five Tests through injury , found enough lift to have Sidhu sharply caught off bat and pad by John Morris .
2640	Morris 's contribution to this match is unlikely to find much space in Wisden , but he already looks the part .
2641	When Chris Lewis replaced Malcolm , ball dominated bat for the first time in the match , with nothing to show for it .
2642	Lewis bowled a yard quicker than on his debut at Edgbaston , hit an impeccable length , and moved the ball away .
2643	When he was not bowling , his cat-like fielding at midwicket kept an appreciative crowd happy .
2644	Shastri had gone on , barely noticed , to 50 , when Gooch 's gentle swingers drew Manjrekar into a loose cut and Jack Russell took the catch .
2645	Dilip Vengsarkar came in looking for his fourth hundred in as many Lord 's appearances and immediately joined Shastri in exploiting the unpatrolled third-man boundary .
2646	After lunch ( 123 for two off 45 overs ) , India stepped on the gas and Gooch turned , not before time , to the off-spin of Eddie Hemmings .
2647	Shastri blocked his first three balls , and hit the next three for 4-4-6 with a straight drive and two elegant swings over mid-wicket .
2648	Malcolm 's return brought him a straight push for three and a ninth Test hundred , but he immediately drove half-heartedly at Hemmings and gave Gooch a simple catch at mid-on .
2649	Vengsarkar , who had been ticking along nicely , was now upstaged by Azharuddin .
2650	Whatever the opposite of a captain 's innings is , he was intent on playing it .
2651	He got off the mark with an uppish straight drive for four , which might have given a less myopic bowler than Malcolm a return catch , and in Malcolm 's next over , he attempted a square slash which , if he had got an edge , might have prevented him ever setting foot in India again .
2652	Happily he missed , tried the shot again a few minutes later , and middled it .
2653	He was sufficiently troubled by Malcolm 's bouncer to stand frozen at the crease and take it on the helmet , but sufficiently brave to try to hook the inevitable follow-up .
2654	He took three audacious fours off an over from Hemmings , and the loss of Vengsarkar , flicking at one of Fraser 's worst deliveries , did nothing to sober him up .
2655	His fifty contained 11 fours , and he celebrated with three more .
2656	Sachin Tendulkar came in to a reception whose volume and pitch tended to confirm what Bishen Bedi had been saying about his sex appeal , and there was the arresting sight of a 41-year-old bowler taking on two batsmen whose combined age was 42 .
2657	After an hour had been lost to rain straight after tea , Tendulkar drove loosely at Lewis and lost his middle stump .
2658	The only man capable of stopping his flow of boundaries was Dickie Bird , who took the players off for bad light for quarter of an hour at 5.30 .
2659	The new ball was taken as soon as it was available , and entrusted to Lewis .
2660	Azharuddin gave him the three-fours-in-an-over treatment , driving all three off the back foot .
2661	He may have been missed on 96 by Morris , low at mid-wicket ; Morris may have decided that sections of the crowd would riot if he held it .
2662	Lewis gave way to Fraser , and Azharuddin brought up a great hundred , and 1,000 for the match , with an easy clip for three .
2663	He lost Manoj Prabhakar , carried away by the exuberance of his own and everybody else 's strokeplay , but Kapil Dev survives - and he is the only Indian who has made a faster Test hundred than Azharuddin 's .
2664	If the follow-on now loomed large , Azharuddin could not see it .
2665	The batting triumphs of Graham Gooch and Graeme Hick ...
2666	Page 24
2667	Motor Racing : Fighting Senna refuses to succumb : Brazilian overcomes cramp and gremlins to keep Prost waiting
2668	From MAURICE HAMILTON in Jerez de la Frontera
2669	AYRTON SENNA did all he could to keep the championship open by yesterday winning the Spanish Grand Prix which , after a week of accusations and exclusions , was something of an anti-climax .
2670	Senna led from the start and , apart from a brief skirmish in the opening laps , never came under serious pressure .
2671	The Ferrari of Gerhard Berger finished second , 26 seconds ahead of Alain Prost 's McLaren .
2672	Prost 's result does little to further his cause in the championship if he has to drop his lower scores but Senna now knows that he must win the final two races in Japan and Australia .
2673	Prost , meanwhile , can do no more and the pressure is now with his team-mate to repeat yesterday 's performance .
2674	While Senna 's steady but swift progress made his 20th Grand Prix victory look easy , the reigning world champion says this race has been one of the toughest .
2675	‘ This is a very difficult circuit , ’ Senna said .
2676	‘ I expected it to be hard because , when we tested here last February , I did a full race distance and it was hard work , very painful . ’
2677	After almost two hours at the wheel yesterday , Senna limped away from his car , the only obvious sign that he had suffered from brake trouble during the last quarter of the 73-lap race .
2678	‘ I had cramp in my right leg , ’ the Brazilian explained .
2679	‘ I was going as carefully as I could because I had a 25-second cushion over Berger so I was able to slow down a bit and the pain eased .
2680	Also , I had trouble with the gearbox , the lever became spongy and I was n't sure what was happening .
2681	It was quite a fretful race for me in many ways . ’
2682	If Senna had not either won the race or finished second , he would have been out of the championship .
2683	Senna said he realised that a good start was vital .
2684	If Berger took the lead into the first corner , then Senna would have difficulty getting by on such a tight and twisting circuit .
2685	Berger said : ‘ He made it to the first corner ahead of me and I tried to hang on .
2686	I pushed as hard as I could but it was obvious there was no chance of passing him . ’
2687	Berger then decided to wait until the scheduled pit stops in the hope that the Ferrari crew could steal an advantage over the McLaren mechanics .
2688	Unfortunately for Berger , both stops were exceptionally slick and , judging by the controversial aftermath of Nigel Mansell 's botched pit stop in Portugal last week , perhaps that is just as well .
2689	It is fair to say that this race lacked the energetic input normally associated with Mansell , banned from yesterday 's Grand Prix after breaking the regulations at Estoril last Sunday .
2690	Once the pit stops , shortly before half distance , were over , the race became even more tedious as Berger heeded sagging oil pressure and reduced his pace .
2691	There was not even the threat of an attack by Prost since he , too , was suffering from gearbox trouble .
2692	‘ This result is exactly what I was looking for , ’ Prost said .
2693	‘ It is very difficult to overtake on this circuit , so it was really mission impossible to get ahead of Senna and Berger in the early stages .
2694	Shortly after the start I had problems with Gerhard 's oil all over my visor , so I just drove my taxi home to take third place . ’
2695	Clearly , the gearbox remained the Achilles ' heel for the McLaren-Honda and it will doubtless cause Senna one or two anxious moments before this season ends in Adelaide on 5 November .
2696	‘ I know it 's going to be very hard for me , ’ said Senna .
2697	‘ But I do n't intend to give up .
2698	I will fight all the way . ’
2699	That is a sentiment which is quietly echoed by McLaren and Honda since , if Prost wins the title , he will take the coveted No. 1 to Ferrari next year .
2700	While Prost and Senna continued their dispute for this year 's title , Jean Alesi reinforced pit lane opinion that the young Frenchman is a future champion .
2701	After a stirring drive , Alesi finished fourth for Tyrrell and , along the way , he had to deal forcefully with Britain 's Martin Brundle , the Brabham driver eventually spinning off .
2702	Brundle 's trouble had been caused by a split exhaust pipe which overheated a shock absorber .
2703	An eventful race for Derek Warwick brought the British driver ninth place but only after he had wiped off a nose cone on his Arrows when he tangled with Nelson Piquet 's Lotus .
2704	The penultimate round of the championship will be in Japan on 22 October .
2705	Golf : Calcavecchia digs in for consolation prize
2706	By TIM GLOVER at St Andrews
2707	IT COULD be said that the Scottish appetite for golf is so healthy they would turn out to watch anybody play .
2708	Even Americans against the Japanese .
2709	An uncommonly large crowd walked the links here yesterday , a neutral army encouraged to watch the final of the Dunhill Cup by the prospect of topping up a tan in October sunshine .
2710	Some of them , by no means all , paid £7 to witness Mark Calcavecchia , Curtis Strange and Tom Kite win $100,000 ( £62,000 ) apiece .
2711	This particular America 's cup bears no comparison to the trophy they failed to capture at The Belfry .
2712	Even so , the money helps .
2713	Asked if this was consolation following the tie in the Ryder Cup , Kite replied : ‘ Yep .
2714	We had our minds made up that we were going to win this thing .
2715	We were all disappointed with the Ryder Cup .
2716	Everybody talked about the good of golf but I do n't think any of the 24 players were satisfied with the outcome . ’
2717	Calcavecchia , who defends the Open Championship here next summer , had never seen St Andrews before and he improved with every round .
2718	In the 36-hole final yesterday , he went round in a five-under-par 67 to defeat Hajime Meshiai by a stroke .
2719	Kite and Naomichi Ozaki shot 68 and Strange defeated Koichi Suzuki with a 72 to a 75 .
2720	Thus the United States established a 2½–½ lead .
2721	Calcavecchia was again first out in the afternoon and he gave poor Meshiai no respite , scoring 66 to a 73 .
2722	On the day Calcavecchia was 11 under par and had 12 birdies and an eagle .
2723	However , he became a victim of Sod 's Law and not everybody appreciated his play .
2724	On the 12th green second time around he was so far from the hole he decided to use his wedge instead of his putter and took a six-inch divot out of the hallowed ground .
2725	Some people booed .
2726	He repeated the act ( the greenkeeper would probably say it was vandalism ) at the 14th green .
2727	It mattered not that Kite was beaten by Suzuki and Strange by Ozaki for the Americans already had an unassailable 3 ½ points on the board .
2728	‘ I really enjoyed it , ’ Calcavecchia said , yawning in mid-sentence .
2729	‘ I knew I was going to be tough to beat this week .
2730	I think I 'm a great putter , sometimes an incredible putter .
2731	It seems that every time I come back from a big disappointment I win . ’
2732	For putter read wedge .
2733	His big disappointment in the Ryder Cup was losing to Ronan Rafferty on the final day after twice putting the ball into water .
2734	Earlier in the season , in the final round of the Bob Hope Classic , he putted like the comedian and lost the tournament by a stroke .
2735	The following week he won in Phoenix by seven strokes .
2736	Over the next two weeks West Germany will have the pleasure of his company .
2737	‘ I 've had enough of this team stuff , ’ he said .
2738	In the play-off for third place — $36,666 ( £22,773 ) per man - England beat Ireland 2-1 .
2739	The match hinged on the confrontation between Christy O'Connor Jnr and Mark James and it was effectively settled at the first hole .
2740	It is a hole in the head as far as the Irishman is concerned .
2741	Against the United States on Saturday , O'Connor Jnr , in a sudden-death play-off against Kite , hit a wedge into the Swilken Burn which runs across the front of the green .
2742	Yesterday he hit an eight-iron into the same stream and took a triple-bogey seven to James 's four .
2743	At the second he had a bogey five to James 's three and was five strokes adrift .
2744	‘ I 'm done , ’ O'Connor Jnr said .
2745	‘ I was like a zombie out there . ’
2746	Rugby Union : The dye is cast for injured Richards
2747	By STEVE BALE
2748	ENGLAND will almost certainly be without their inspirational Lions No. 8 , Dean Richards , when they play Fiji in five weeks .
2749	Richards , who did not attend yesterday 's badly disrupted squad session at The Stoop , is to have dye injected into his injured shoulder to show up the extent of the damage .
2750	‘ You ca n't predict anything until he has seen the scan , but Dean is looking very doubtful , ’ England 's manager , Geoff Cooke , said .
2751	Wade Dooley and Paul Rendall were also absent .
2752	Seven players — Carling , Oti , Hill , Moore , Mullins , Linnett and Teague — attended the session but did not train with the squad .
2753	Two , Bailey and Egerton , finished early .
2754	Cooke accepts that Chris Oti will not be ready to face Fiji .
2755	Mike Teague ( who now has a knee , as well as a shoulder , injury ) is doubtful but Will Carling , the captain , says he will be fit despite being concussed in Harlequins ' win over London Irish .
2756	Carling has already targeted Quins ' First Division game with Orrell on 28 October for his return .
2757	In Wales , battle lines are being drawn for Friday 's meeting to debate the severing of links with South Africa .
2758	Clive Rowlands , the Welsh RU president , has written to member clubs urging them to follow this course .
2759	‘ We have been brought to our present position by the policy and behaviour of the South African Rugby Board , ’ he said .
2760	‘ They have been ready to give priority to their own interests regardless of the effects on other unions and particularly on the Welsh Rugby Union . ’
2761	Rowlands has been critical of Welsh officials who went to the SA Rugby Board celebrations .
2762	But Terry Vaux , the WRU committeeman who resigned from the International Board because of the row , has written to clubs in his area , Gwent , informing them that Rowlands had encouraged him to attend .
2763	Welsh rugby is also in trouble on the field — on Saturday , five weeks before Wales play New Zealand , they lost to Bridgend — and a thigh injury in that debacle has put David Young out of the Home Unions XV who play France on Wednesday .
2764	Jeff Probyn , the England and Wasps prop overlooked for the Lions tour , has been called up as his replacement .
2765	Donal Lenihan , who had been named as captain , has also withdrawn after injuring a shoulder .
2766	His place in the second row is taken by Scotland 's Damian Cronin , with England 's Rob Andrew taking over the captaincy .
2767	Football : FA investigates crowd trouble
2768	By STEVE BALE
2769	THE Football Association is to launch an inquiry into the crowd trouble involving Birmingham City supporters at Blackpool on Saturday , when police in riot gear had to move into the terraces to part fighting fans .
2770	Adrian Titcombe , the FA 's crowd management co-ordinator , said : ‘ We want to be clear where the trouble occurred so we will study all the reports before coming to any conclusion . ’
2771	The FA made Birmingham 's away matches all-ticket after trouble at Crystal Palace last season and Chief Supt Kenneth McKay , head of Blackpool police , said fans without tickets caused most of the trouble .
2772	‘ Two hundred fans arrived without tickets and there were 3,000 in the town causing all manner of problems , terrorising elderly women and children , ’ he said .
2773	The FA will also investigate Dunstable 's bizarre exit from the FA Cup on Saturday when the entire team walked off in their second-round qualifying tie at Staines after having three players sent off in the first 38 minutes .
2774	The Southern League team are expected to be expelled from the competition .
2775	Kevin Drinkell , the Rangers striker , will join Coventry City today for £800,000 and make his debut against an old club , Grimsby , in the Littlewoods Cup on Wednesday .
2776	Peter Davenport , who joined Middlesbrough from Manchester United for £700,000 less than a year ago , may seek a move after being left out of the squad for Saturday 's game at Watford .
2777	Cycling : Vanderaerden 's Classic clout
2778	By ROBIN NICHOLL with the Nissan Classic
2779	AFTER four days of sparring , Eric Vanderaerden unleashed his Sunday punch to knock out the fading hopes of Sean Kelly , and the whole of Ireland , in the Nissan Classic , which finished in Dublin yesterday after five days and 925km .
2780	The Belgian , who had popped out of the clinches to snatch narrow verdicts in three mass sprint finishes , settled the race with a remarkable show in the 40km time trial .
2781	Not since 1985 , when he won a Tour de France time trial , had Vanderaerden shown such form against the clock .
2782	Not only did he catch a crestfallen Kelly , who had started a minute ahead of him , but he socked the hopes of Frenchman Charly Mottet and the Swiss powerhouse Thomas Wegmuller .
2783	Vanderaerden averaged more than 46kph to beat Mottet by nine seconds , then , aided by his Panasonic teammates , carefully controlled the afternoon race through the Wicklow mountains .
2784	‘ I now feel that I am back to the form I had three years ago , and after my performances in Ireland , I feel I can win the Paris-Tours classic next Saturday , ’ he said .
2785	Kelly finished fourth overall , ousted from second place by Mottet and Wegmuller , and came close to losing the King of the Mountains honour .
2786	Only on the final climb of Sally Gap did he clinch victory as his rival , Gary Baker , was struggling back from two punctures .
2787	Kelly , who has won this race three times , said : ‘ It has been a very long and hard season for me , and I feel very tired .
2788	Still , the best man won . ’
2789	Rugby League : Kiwis humbled by Saints
2790	By PAUL WILSON
2791	St Helens .... 27 New Zealand .. 26 THE meagre attendance of 6,940 at Knowsley Road was hardly surprising , given Alex Murphy 's under-selling of his own side , but the Saints supporters who stayed away missed a rare and unexpected rugby league treat .
2792	Tony Gordon 's Kiwis , who will now find it difficult to go through the remainder of their tour undefeated , are not as tight and efficient a force as Graham Lowe 's team of four years ago , but with a virtual Test side out , should have been far too strong for Murphy 's collection of reserves .
2793	That Saints managed to cause an upset with nothing more than direct running and honest endeavour , bodes well for Great Britain , though the Kiwis can not be expected to enter the Test arena in such a generous mood .
2794	Gary Freeman , for instance , the scorer of the tries which knocked Britain out of the World Cup last year , was yesterday to be seen vainly flapping after Roy Haggerty , prior to Neil Holding 's all-important drop goal .
2795	The Kiwis wasted two excellent try opportunties with careless forward passes , and gifted St Helens the opening try when David Watson allowed Alan Hunte a 15th-minute interception .
2796	Quick replies by Kelly Shelford and Mark Elia led to the suspicion that New Zealand could score at will and were easing themselves into their stride , but doubts arose early in the second half with a succession of missed chances .
2797	It was Stuart Evans , bringing a touch of Cardiff Arms Park to the proceedings with a pushover try in the right corner , who brought Saints to within a point at 14-15 .
2798	New Zealand pushed out to 26-15 with a Kevin Iro try and a second from Elia , but after David Tanner had pegged two points back with a penalty , the winger claimed the try of the match by finishing a thrilling move between Phil Veivers and Mark Bailey .
2799	Paul Forber scored from close range three minutes from the end to give Saints a one-point lead and the crowd , such as it was , went wild .
2800	There was even closing drama when Shelford missed a penalty , and a chance to save the game , with the last kick of the match .
2801	It was entertaining viewing for Mal Meninga , watching the game with his Canberra colleagues , but the Australian declined a £50,000 offer , made after the game , to rejoin St Helens .
2802	Athletics : Elliott 's win saves blushes
2803	By NEIL WILSON
2804	PETER ELLIOTT saved England 's selectors from any embarrassment yesterday , finishing his track season unbeaten by domestic rivals .
2805	Southwark Park , beside the Thames in London 's former docklands , on a cool , grey October evening , is hardly Auckland , and Steve Cram was nowhere in sight .
2806	But a victory by Elliott in the final event of General Portfolio 's grandly mis-named Mile of Miles series was all that mattered to selectors three days after they chose him ahead of Cram for the Commonwealth Games .
2807	It was never in doubt .
2808	Only Said Aouita has beaten Elliott since the Yorkshireman returned to the track after an injury postponed the start of his season until mid-August .
2809	Only a week ago , he was in New York beating the world champion , Abdi Bile , and the best of the rest at this distance .
2810	Nobody remotely approaching that calibre threatened him yesterday .
2811	Having won two of this series in the fastest times already , he would have had to finish four seconds behind the steeplechaser Mark Rowland to lose the first prize of £5,000 .
2812	Elliott was not entirely satisfied .
2813	He hoped to surpass Cram 's fastest mile time of the year to remove the last argument against his own selection , but after two laps of inadequate pacing , he was never in prospect .
2814	‘ This late in the year even pacemakers are tired , ’ Elliott said after finishing in 3min 54.46sec .
2815	He managed to complete the last lap with a flourish in a little under a minute , opening up a 10-metre lead down the back straight .
2816	The £3,000 prize in the women 's event went to Bev Nicholson , another athlete bound for Auckland .
2817	Rugby Union : Welsh horizon all turns black
2818	By STEVE BALE
2819	EACH new indignity in the heap visited on Welsh rugby seems worse than the last .
2820	The selectors knew they were playing with fire when they decided to arrange a couple of club fixtures and they have duly been consumed in a conflagration of their own making .
2821	The New Zealanders , appropriately garbed in funereal black , arrive next week to scatter the ashes .
2822	On and off the field the national game of the Land of Song is in a discordant mess .
2823	Losing was one thing but to lose as spinelessly as the Welsh XV did to Bridgend on Saturday was to add insult to severely injured pride .
2824	‘ In all honesty we should have won by at least 15 points , ’ Brian Nicholas , the Bridgend coach , said .
2825	as if 24-17 and derisive chants of ‘ Easy , easy ’ were not bad enough , this humiliation was against a side who have made a wretched start to the season — a week earlier Pontypool had given them a 35-6 going-over — and were short of at least half-a-dozen first-choice players .
2826	Four of the absentees suffered the squirming discomfort of being among the Welsh squad .
2827	‘ It 's not that I do n't want to say anything but I just do n't know what to say , ’ John Ryan , the Welsh coach , sighed .
2828	His plans in ruins , he is now reduced , Micawber-like , to hoping something will turn up before his players face the All Blacks in five short weeks .
2829	At Bridgend he looked in despair , and he almost admitted as much : ‘ I hope we can pull it together but sometimes I have my doubts . ’
2830	Nicholas was sympathetic : ‘ He is only as good as the players we give him . ’
2831	But another selector confided the truth that Wales should be giving club opposition a hammering — and at half-time , building on their win over Newbridge , it looked as if they would .
2832	They had weathered Bridgend 's early fury , conceding a try before coming back with some confidence to score three of their own .
2833	But Wales were having us on .
2834	From the comparative opulence of 17-6 they then slipped into penury by conceding 18 unanswered points .
2835	Bridgend raised their game against Wales ; now Wales must do precisely the same against New Zealand .
2836	No one who was at the Brewery Field ( perhaps not even the selectors ) would give twopence for their ability to do so .
2837	The backs were mainly pedestrian but the fundamental problem lay elsewhere .
2838	Apart from Kevin Moseley 's steady supply from the line-out , there was nothing much to commend in a Welsh forward effort which reverted to the very worst Eighties stereotype of static , cumbersome donkeys only too willing to slow the game to walking pace .
2839	‘ When the pressure comes on , players revert to bad habits , ’ Ryan said .
2840	The All Blacks would treat such an outmoded approach with the scorn it deserves , although on the other hand they might have been impressed with Bridgend 's contrasting mobility and aggression .
2841	The back row were swifter to the loose ball , had a clearer idea of what to do with it when they got there , and their impressive half-backs were given every opportunity — which they eagerly took — to control the game .
2842	This was conveniently encapsulated in the first try .
2843	Wales , characteristically , delayed the heel at a scrum , putting Robert Jones in trouble when the ball finally emerged .
2844	He was scragged by Mike Budd , Jeremy Cooper came away with the ball , Owain Williams acted as the link , and Kevin Ellis scored : three back-row forwards and their scrum-half in perfect harmony .
2845	Wales 's instant reaction , a try by Arthur Emyr , and subsequent steady improvement , bringing well-crafted tries for Emyr and Robert Jones , promised more than was later fulfilled .
2846	In the third quarter Bridgend had little difficulty in wiping out an 11-point deficit , Huw Bevan supporting Aled Williams 's break for their second try .
2847	It was a magnificent fightback and such was Welsh distress that they never looked like preventing it .
2848	‘ We have taken a step backward , ’ Ryan said — and on this sorry evidence it looks as if it will be backwards all the way when the Test takes place at Cardiff Arms Park on 4 November .
2849	As the Welsh squad do not meet again until 30 October , time has all but run out .
2850	Rugby Union : Summit a total success for Bath
2851	By ROBERT COLE
2852	Neath ..... 13 Bath ...... 17 WHEN the undisputed club champions of Wales and England collide , sparks can be expected to fly , and Saturday 's game provided the perfect blend of drama , skill and excitement .
2853	Since Neath were without five of their Welsh squad members , including their inspirational leader Kevin Phillips , when something had to give it was the home side .
2854	Defeat for the Welsh All Blacks , particularly at the fortress that is The Gnoll , is a rare occurrence , hated by the players , frowned upon by the coaches and detested by the increasing army of fans who continue to pack the ground .
2855	But whatever their collective response to coming second , no one could complain of losing to a Bath side so replete with experienced English caps and burgeoning talent .
2856	The English Cup and league champions brought to an end a 33-match unbeaten home run by Neath , dating back to Pontypool 's visit on 8 March , 1988 , and recorded their first win over Neath since 1983 .
2857	Yet what pleased the Bath coach Jack Rowell more than the cold facts and figures was that his team had come to terms with Neath 's ‘ unique style of total rugby ’ .
2858	That was the greatest triumph .
2859	‘ The only way forward for British rugby is to play that standard of game every week , ’ he added .
2860	‘ Playing regularly in south Wales has helped us to go places and 10 years on it 's nice to crown it with a win like this .
2861	Now we must look to the next stage of development .
2862	‘ As a side you have to learn to cope with new styles , temperaments and pressures .
2863	That 's one of the reasons why we want to play the best sides in Europe . ’
2864	Having dispatched the pride of Romania , Steaua Bucharest , and the cream of Wales , Neath , Toulon are next on the Bath hit-list .
2865	To succeed again they will have to improve their fitness and concentration , the only flaws in an otherwise faultless game-plan .
2866	Having raced into a 14-point interval lead , thanks to two tries from Tony Swift , another from Richard Lee and a Jonathan Callard conversion , they nearly allowed themselves to be knocked out of their stride by Neath 's bludgeoning approach .
2867	Tries by Allan Bateman and Colin Laity brought the home team back into the hunt and set up a stirring finale to the heavyweight contest .
2868	Rugby Union : Snook 's struggle for survival
2869	By BARRIE FAIRALL
2870	Bedford ..... 6 Wasps ...... 57 BEDFORD have now conceded 117 points in their last two matches and this latest reversal served only to illustrate the plight of a club who a few months ago were celebrating their arrival in the Courage First Division .
2871	In theory , things can only get better ; in practice , they may well become a lot worse before Wasps return in the league next March .
2872	While Wasps could relax and enjoy their Goldington Road romp , Bedford learned nothing that they did not know already .
2873	Frailties throughout the team had been ruthlessly exploited at Leicester , where they were taken for 60 points .
2874	Here , within three minutes , Mark Bailey had rounded their defence for the first of his side 's dozen tries .
2875	It will require a miracle for Bedford to retain their status , even allowing for their few plus points — a top New Zealand coach , the arrival of a useful looking New Zealand scrum-half , and the fact that if the three national divisions are expanded , as proposed , next season , only one team will be going down from the First Division .
2876	So Bedford must make the most of limited resources — and pray .
2877	The Taranaki coach , Ian Snook , accepts that it is a hard task trying to keep Bedford afloat but , sink or swim , he will be grateful for any signs of improvement .
2878	As for Grant Patterson , Snook 's countryman may prove a crucial figure in Bedford 's cause .
2879	A sniping and competitive scrum-half straight out of the All Black mould , he has to serve out his time but qualifies to play in the league in the new year .
2880	By then , Bedford will be left fighting for survival in four crunching closing fixtures and when Patterson makes his likely league debut it will be in Bath , of all places .
2881	Then come Wasps , Rosslyn Park and finally Bristol .
2882	Luck they need because on Saturday Wasps , one of the main contenders for the heavyweight Bath title , inflicted much mental and physical damage .
2883	From Bailey 's first thrust to Simon Smith 's closing dig there was only one side in it as Bedford stumbled to their fourth defeat in five matches .
2884	Rugby Union : Bowling swings it for Llanelli
2885	By JIM HILL
2886	Llanelli ....... 27 Leicester ....... 8 GOING for the gap took on a painful new meaning for Steve Bowling when he helped Llanelli claw their way back to win this entertaining game .
2887	In scoring the try which restored Llanelli 's lead and waning confidence deep in the second half , the left wing Bowling got an accidental boot in the mouth .
2888	It left him dazed , bleeding profusely and minus a front tooth .
2889	Bowling took no further part in the proceedings , but he may think it a small price to pay for providing one of the turning points in a memorable match .
2890	It was a contest to restore one 's faith in a game which is allegedly losing its way .
2891	Llanelli , who had six of their best with Wales and several others injured , replaced experience with unbridled exuberance .
2892	Leicester , who arrived without four regulars , were no less adventurous .
2893	Orchestrated by their stand-off and acting skipper Les Cusworth , they were even prepared to run the ball from behind their own line and the kick to touch was an absolute last resort .
2894	Rarely can two sets of forwards have covered so much ground and sustained so furious a pace in their efforts to set up scoring chances .
2895	And outstanding among them were the visiting prop Wayne Richardson and Llanelli 's hooker Andrew Lamerton .
2896	To illustrate the excellence , the brothers Underwood combined to produce the best of the seven tries .
2897	Tony , on the Leicester right , started it five yards from his own line with a brilliant burst which took him over the half-way line .
2898	Richardson then made more ground and , when Cusworth spun out the scoring pass , England 's Rory Underwood obliged with a typical one-handed touchdown .
2899	John Liley converted to give Leicester a 12-10 lead which they stretched to 18-10 before Bowling and Llanelli hit back .
2900	Rugby Union : Students deliver a lesson
2901	By STUART ALEXANDER
2902	Cambridge University .... 28 Northampton .............. 4 THE Light Blues looked anything but lightweight in their first run-out of the season against supposedly senior opposition .
2903	First they had to lend some maroon LX Club shirts to a Northampton side who had forgotten to bring theirs along , and then the students gave a lesson in speed about the field , quick thinking and teamwork .
2904	No wonder their coach Tony Rodgers could scarcely restrain a grin at the end as a cluster of Northampton committee men tried to work out why they had also travelled with little sense of direction , wit , wisdom or work rate .
2905	Rodgers knows there is a long way to go before the big one in December , but he has the makings of a strong , hard pack and the chance of additional talent behind them providing injury does not intervene .
2906	Although the No. 8 Rob Wainright broke his leg in midweek , he could be back in training in November , and in John Wilby he had a deputy who shone in the back row .
2907	Northampton , too , were missing key players , going down by five tries to a consolation one .
2908	Two tries , the first in under two minutes by Simon Holmes and the fourth by the hooker John Ashworth , were from alert attention to the ball at their own throw-in near their own line .
2909	Andrew Davies , Paul Reed and captain Alan Buzza coped with the slippery drizzle to score the others , and Saints were spared another 14 points in missed kicks .
2910	Rugby Union : Kelso in need of their imports
2911	By BILL LEITH
2912	Kelso ........ 18 Heriot 's FP .. 29 KELSO , the champions , languish bottom of the Scottish First Division — in the illustrious company of Hawick , among others — ironically after preparing more thoroughly than usual .
2913	The harvest was early and they had a pre-season tour .
2914	Hopes of a title hat-trick hang by a thread , but all is not quite lost .
2915	Gary Callander , the former Scotland hooker , is in cracking form again and , with John Jeffrey staying down and grafting at second row , they took particular encouragement from their scrummaging in an 18-29 defeat by the powerhouse Heriot 's .
2916	Any real revival hopes , however , hinge on the New Zealanders Brian Bellingham , a wing , and Steve Autogavea , a lock , who are due to arrive from Auckland in midweek .
2917	Since Sean Lineen changed nationality to win four caps last season , every Kiwi migrant is now the subject of intense scrutiny and great expectations .
2918	In Bellingham 's case , there is the added pressure of impressive advance billing from his ex-clubmate Lineen .
2919	Had they seen Saturday 's encounter , the Kiwis might have been tempted to catch a plane home .
2920	Heriot 's , stronger in the set-piece and sharper on the rare occasions play flowed , scored tries through Cameron Glasgow , Gary Kenhard and Peter Steven and kept their own line intact .
2921	Some 35 penalties were awarded , the teams occasionally shaking their heads in bafflement .
2922	Fortunately , frustration surfaced only in sporadic back-chat , but when teams such as Kelso and Heriot 's , each with a tradition of expansive back play , fail to put on a show in glorious conditions something , surely , is wrong .
2923	Rugby Union : Yorkshire 's home works
2924	By PAUL STEPHENS
2925	Yorkshire .... 29 Durham ....... 16 FORCED to abandon the selection policy that in recent seasons embraced many of the top players qualified for the county but living well out of it in favour of those representing clubs within the broad acres , Yorkshire made an emphatic and ebullient start at Otley in an effort to regain the title they last won in 1987 .
2926	The immediate benefit of discarding established regulars was an accumulated perception and zest for attack that Durham were unable to match .
2927	Notwithstanding a marked inferiority at centre and back row , the champions , with only nine of their title-winning side and four newcomers to county rugby , made an unstinting contribution to a fluid game in which they were outscored in tries only three to four .
2928	It was as well for Yorkshire that John Howe and John Dixon were unable to assert any aerial authority for , early in the first half , John Orwin collided with the newcomer Steve Harris , suffered a neck injury and , though he stayed on , was a virtual passenger .
2929	He will miss tomorrow 's encounter with Cheshire .
2930	It meant that Yorkshire , if not previously committed to open plan , had no choice than to adopt one .
2931	This suited Peter Buckton and Simon Tipping admirably ; they made the best possible use of the loose ball , punching holes through the Durham defence so that , as the final quarter was reached , Yorkshire led 25-6 .
2932	Powerless to halt the irresistible Simon Irving and Paul Johnson , Howe led a spirited fightback with a try , to which Dave Cooke — the best of the title holders ' backs — added another , but Johnson later confirmed Yorkshire 's legitimate hopes of being northern group winners with a third score from the backs .
2933	Basketball : Roberts walks tall to fell Giants
2934	By DUNCAN HOOPER
2935	BRACKNELL Tigers maintained their run as England 's most successful pot hunters when they defeated Manchester Giants 97-91 in the final of the Tournament of Champions at the Granby Halls , Leicester .
2936	For the Tigers , who won the Coca-Cola National Cup and NatWest Trophy last season , Dale Roberts collected 34 points and the game 's Most Valuable Player award .
2937	Kingston , whose coach Kevin Cadle watched Friday night 's semi-final , did not qualify for the tournament because they did not compete in the League last season although their form over the past three weeks suggests they will be front runners over the next seven months .
2938	Just five minutes into Saturday 's final Giants lost the 6ft 9in England forward Dave Gardner with a sprained ankle .
2939	His departure , combined with those of Chris Kearney and Jason Fogerty who both fouled out in the last five minutes , proved crucial to the outcome .
2940	In the first half Bracknell , inspired by another England player , Tony Balogun , had opened a 36-24 lead .
2941	But they trailed 58-53 early in the second period after Giants ' Kevin St Kitts and Jerry Johnson spearheaded a 14-0 spurt .
2942	From then until the final three minutes rarely more than one basket separated the teams , as Tigers came back again , until Roberts scored and free-throws from Tom Seaman and Paul James gave Bracknell breathing space at 95-92 .
2943	Roberts , fittingly , scored the game 's final point from the foul line .
2944	Australian Rules : Hawks swoop to be team of the decade
2945	By DUNCAN HOOPER
2946	( First Edition ) HAWTHORN won their second consecutive Victorian Football League premiership on Saturday , defeating Geelong by six points before more than 100,000 spectators in Melbourne .
2947	The victory , 21-18 ( 144 ) to 21-12 ( 138 ) , established the Hawks as the club of the decade , it being the team 's fourth title in seven years , and their ninth consecutive grand final .
2948	Hawthorn took the lead early in the first quarter and the Cats then had to play catch-up .
2949	Geelong forward Gary Ablett led his team with a record-breaking nine goals and became only the second person to win the most valuable player award while playing on a losing side .
2950	Geelong , who finished ninth last year , were the underdogs for the match but came within one straight kick of achieving the impossible dream , in coach Malcolm Blight 's first year .
2951	Football : Hazard hints at the missing gifts
2952	By PATRICK BARCLAY
2953	HOW TO describe Saturday 's match between Chelsea and Arsenal ?
2954	Well , I seem to recall a London gallery exhibiting a pile of rubbish , which was considered valid art by the proprietors and drew a large attendance .
2955	The only redeeming feature of a goalless , worthless event at Stamford Bridge was that it did not require a grant .
2956	Yet the Chelsea manager , Bobby Campbell , and Arsenal assistant , Theo Foley , agreed it had been a good match , and the spectators ' complaints were muted .
2957	Some even applauded the players at the end .
2958	It takes all sorts .
2959	Bobby Robson was there to assess World Cup candidates , but nothing positive emerged from 90 minutes of scuffling that made one almost yearn for the more measured boredom of Rangers ' European Cup exit in Munich three days earlier .
2960	At least the outcome was appropriate .
2961	Had either of the teams won , they would have taken the League leadership .
2962	Instead Liverpool stayed top without kicking a ball .
2963	Television had postponed Manchester United 's scheduled visit to Anfield so it could be shown live on 22 December , the longest night .
2964	London 's leading pair , as if piqued by this , turned 30 September into the longest afternoon .
2965	On and on it dragged .
2966	Lacking a goal that might have altered its chemistry , it remained a matter of dull physics .
2967	Yet many of the crowd were kept interested by the possibility of victory , which is , I suppose , what derbies are about .
2968	They are so frequent these days in London , which has eight of 20 First Division clubs , that we must expect aesthetic considerations to be overridden .
2969	Why , though , could these supposed championship contenders not have tried to emulate the fine passing that had sprinkled the previous weekend 's Merseyside joust ?
2970	The simple answer is that Chelsea are in a false position and Arsenal , on this evidence , slightly jaded champions .
2971	They ought to have pocketed three points in the first half-hour but Tony Adams , a more threatening centre-forward on his forays than the current Alan Smith , missed the target with two headers and David Rocastle let Dave Beasant save a penalty , much as the stretch-version keeper had done for Wimbledon in the 1988 FA Cup final .
2972	Now an Arsenal team in peak health would have kept a grip on the match .
2973	This one could not .
2974	As George Graham indicated upon his side 's accession to the title , they would need more composure and sophistication to match Liverpool in the longer term .
2975	He chose not to hasten the process by buying .
2976	After all , he had just the man on his staff .
2977	But Paul Davis remains unfit .
2978	His absence is increasingly conspicuous and Liverpool , for the moment , in a super league of one .
2979	Davis , of course , would have walked into England 's team in Poland a week on Wednesday ; until last season 's prolonged suspension , followed by injury , Bobby Robson had him firmly pencilled in as Bryan Robson 's replacement .
2980	Michael Thomas , several years younger , is not quite in the same class yet but may have to play in Chorzow .
2981	If so , it will be a gamble , because he flopped on his only previous international appearance in Saudi Arabia .
2982	The odds are favourable enough according to Chelsea 's Mike Hazard , who said of his adversary : ‘ He could cope in Poland , not just because of his ability to close people down and use the ball well , but temperament — you saw that when he scored the goal that won Arsenal the League . ’
2983	Very kind , but international players are supposed to be habitually influential , and it was Hazard who in the second half , with a few incisive passes , gifts from the heavens on a day like this , left a greater mark .
2984	Chelsea might have won had the ball not kept turning into a Mexican bean at Kerry Dixon 's feet .
2985	Campbell 's hard-working side are still trying to sort out their system , which involves a spare defender and , as far as one can see , a good deal of improvisation .
2986	It should suit Tony Dorigo , the unblooded England left-back , though oddly his rival , Nigel Winterburn , did more rampaging on Saturday ; neither , in truth , made the heart pound .
2987	Dorigo at least had the satisfaction of seeing his direct opponent and England colleague David Rocastle withdrawn .
2988	All in all , Bobby Robson must have found it about as fruitful as a day trying to get in touch with Brian Clough .
2989	There was , however , one aspect that deserves commendation .
2990	After 16 minutes Graham Roberts was injured by a tackle for which Perry Groves was booked ( Steve Clarke took over as sweeper , and is likely to have several weeks in which to build on a promising display ) .
2991	Roberts 's ankle appeared broken , but the Chelsea players were not interested in retribution and the club , as soon as they knew the injury was less serious , put a message on the electronic scoreboard : an example of public relations from which others could learn .
2992	Football : Lineker crackers paper the cracks
2993	By JOE LOVEJOY
2994	Tottenham Hotspur ..... 3 Queen 's Park Rangers .. 2 THE GROUND is beginning to look like the finished article , but work on the team is still behind schedule .
2995	The East Stand at White Hart Lane , open for business for the first time , provided a gleaming backdrop for Gary Lineker 's first hat-trick for two years , but Gary 's glory game served only to paper over Tottenham 's cracks .
2996	QPR are not good enough to finish in the top six , according to Trevor Francis , their player-manager , but they should have won and would surely have done so but for a mind-boggling miss by Andy Sinton when it was 2-2 .
2997	For the second week in succession , Spurs ' dodgy defence had thrown away a 2-0 lead .
2998	Lineker spared their blushes this time , but not even the striker acclaimed by Francis as Europe 's best ( Gullit may sue ) can oblige every week if the requirement is two goals for a draw , three for a win .
2999	‘ Of course , some things are still not right , ’ Terry Venables , approaching the second anniversary of his appointment , said .
3000	Two new players were needed to take Spurs where they wanted to go .
3001	Murmurs of discontent off-stage .
3002	‘ He has signed 12 already .
3003	Where are they going — Twickenham ? ’
3004	The most pressing need is for a centre-half to prevent the sort of soft header with which David Bardsley brought QPR back into contention , and a more productive partner for Lineker .
3005	Venables continues to pursue Mark Wright , Derby County 's England defender , and is giving serious consideration to the swap proposed by Everton which would take Paul Stewart , Tottenham 's blunt instrument of a centre-forward , to Goodison Park in exchange for Tony Cottee .
3006	The deal would have been done by now but for Venables 's reservations about playing two penalty-area sniffers together without an orthodox No. 9 to provide an aerial target .
3007	It worked at West Ham , where Cottee enjoyed a profitable partnership with Frank McAvennie , who is scarcely from the Mick Harford mould .
3008	And anyway , the bottom line should be Cottee is unquestionably a better footballer than Stewart .
3009	In contrast to his partner 's thud and blunder , Lineker 's finishing was of the highest order .
3010	His second goal was the highlight of the afternoon — the single-minded determination to score almost as impressive as the execution which saw him hold off Paul Parker and Alan McDonald and allow the ball to run past him before spinning and shooting across David Seaman , from right to left .
3011	Two-nil up at home against moderate opposition — it would have been downhill all the way for most teams .
3012	But then most teams are not lumbered with Spurs ' defence .
3013	Bardsley and Francis profited from their collective inadequacy , and at 2-2 it was anybody 's game .
3014	It should have been QPR 's , when Sinton , set up by Bardsley , somehow contrived to shoot wide .
3015	Instead , Nayim 's cutback from the byline on the left enabled Lineker to win it for Tottenham .
3016	Four goals in two games .
3017	Was he over his illness and restored to peak efficiency ?
3018	A thin smile .
3019	‘ Not that one again .
3020	Every time I go through a lean spell I 've lost a yard ; every time I score a goal it means I 'm over the hepatitis .
3021	I always knew the goals would come . ’
3022	Football : UEFA Women 's Championship Group Three game at Brentford
3023	By JOE LOVEJOY
3024	Jan Murray , the England left wing , avoids becoming the filling in a Finnish defenders ' sandwich during the UEFA Women 's Championship Group Three game at Brentford yesterday .
3025	England failed to take their chances , many of which were created by Gillian Coultard in midfield , and the game finished goalless Photograph : Peter Jay
3026	Football : Platt ploughs a lone furrow of excellence
3027	By PHIL SHAW
3028	Aston Villa ....... 1 Derby County ...... 0 WHEN the tough get going , to paraphrase that wonderful bit of locker-room nonsense , the Villa usually get left behind .
3029	In defeating Derby they simply got lucky .
3030	Villa began the afternoon where they finished in May , one rung above the relegation places , although this time last year they stood fifth in the First Division .
3031	That they are already struggling clearly troubles Graham Taylor .
3032	The Villa manager spent £1.2m in February on Ian Ormondroyd and Nigel Callaghan — neither of whom made Saturday 's starting line-up — and a further £1m during the summer .
3033	Taylor wanted the Rangers striker Kevin Drinkell — now Coventry-bound — but chairman Doug Ellis was apparently reluctant to back his judgement .
3034	A separation may now be imminent .
3035	David Platt is making a brave fist of replacing Alan McInally — his goal , brilliantly struck from an angle after he had gone round Peter Shilton , was his fifth this season — but he cut a solitary , composed figure in a side bereft of confidence and quality .
3036	Derek Mountfield and Kevin Gage were horribly out of touch ; the scalpel tongues went for Chris Price in that peculiarly cutting way reserved for baldies playing badly ; and the introduction of Ormondroyd , the forward built like a Handsworth tower block , brought cruelly sarcastic cheers .
3037	Where does that leave Derby ?
3038	Aggrieved after looking the more cohesive , balanced unit ; incredulous that after so many chances they still have just five goals .
3039	Dean Saunders should at least have emulated Trevor Francis 's hat-trick at Villa Park a week earlier , and Paul Goddard 's anger at being substituted suggested all is not well with last season 's fifth-placed team .
3040	Arthur Cox 's admiration for John Fashanu is well known , and perhaps it is time for the Maxwell millions to be used to purchase just such a battering Ram .
3041	The need for an element of surprise is also glaring , and it would be worth Cox 's monitoring the John Sheridan situation at Forest .
3042	Both sides are in Littlewoods Cup action this week .
3043	Derby start 2-1 down to Cambridge and Villa defend the same score at Wolves , where Taylor may have to trust in another piece of sports sagacity .
3044	Fast guys tire , a basketball coach once said of his own high-rise team , but big guys do n't shrink .
3045	Football : Bowen belittles the Millwall machismo
3046	By NICK DUXBURY
3047	Millwall ........ 0 Norwich City .... 1 GRAFFITI displaying the legend ‘ lesbians ignite ’ ; T-shirts bearing the sinister slogan ‘ These colours do not run ’ ; and simulated sex over the Tannoy gave every indication that Millwall was still a Den of iniquity .
3048	Innocuous would be nearer the mark .
3049	The activists ' message scrawled on a wall near the ground is some way removed from the burning passions normally aroused by football , while the T-shirts are more machismo than menace , and pop songs peppered with heavy breathing are apparently in vogue if not in keeping with pre-match entertainment .
3050	Cold Blow Lane no longer chills the blood for all the wrong reasons , but that is not to say the Lions have gone soft .
3051	Norwich will testify to a victory hard won .
3052	Millwall were unbeaten at home and only the Canaries ' ability to metamorphose into a giant yellow sponge kept Teddy Sheringham and Tony Cascarino soaked in sweat and starved of success .
3053	The squeeze was on from the start , Mark Bowen clearing off the line in the fourth minute and again in the 84th from Terry Hurlock 's drive as Norwich maintained a startling statistic of having yet to concede an away goal .
3054	They have also yet to lose in the League , Millwall 's threat being thwarted by a dogged defence and a dollop of luck .
3055	The Lions like the high way but are not rigid disciples of one code , and passes to feet compared favourably with passes measured in feet from the ground .
3056	The pass master was Gary Waddock , playing only his second First Division game after a two-and-a-half year absence caused by a knee injury .
3057	Waddock even overshadowed Hurlock until the sting of falling behind injected the long-haired harrier with more drive .
3058	Millwall 's chagrin was heightened by the knowledge that their redoubt had been stormed by a full-back , Bowen 's 60th minute winner being a cold blooded execution from Robert Fleck 's spear of a short through-ball .
3059	As Bowen admitted , it had been ‘ like the Alamo ’ for Norwich and bastions was on the lips of every Millwall supporter as they headed home complaining of an iniquitous defeat , their moans contrasting the broadcasted cries of consummation .
3060	Football : Nicholas needs live bullets
3061	By DON LINDSAY
3062	Aberdeen .... 1 Celtic ...... 1 AS A CHEEKY teenager who was capable of scoring more than 30 goals a season , Charlie Nicholas earned the nickname the Cannonball Kid .
3063	Sadly , Charlie 's arsenal has been dampened and diminished in his post-Parkhead years , and finding the back of the net now has become rather less of a habit .
3064	So far this season , Nicholas has fired only blanks , 13 matches having passed by without him hitting the target .
3065	‘ He 's not the first striker to go a few games without scoring , ’ Alex Smith , the Aberdeen manager , said .
3066	‘ It will eventually happen and when it does it will be like a release valve .
3067	But as long as he is setting up things for other people , that 's fine by me . ’
3068	Nicholas 's lack of success in front of goal , though , underlines Aberdeen 's Achilles ' heel — the inability to make pressure tell .
3069	In Jim Bett , Paul Mason , Brian Grant and Craig Robertson , they have an effective and , at times , elegant midfield , which can impose its will on opponents , but too often the opportunities created come to nought .
3070	Saturday 's goal was the product of some poor defending by Celtic and the alertness of Mason in picking out the ginger nut of Alex McLeish , but , again , they relied on a defender to score .
3071	Although two points clear of the pack , the writing is on the wall for Aberdeen unless someone starts banging goals away .
3072	Joe Miller was the subject of praise from Billy McNeill , the Celtic manager .
3073	The winger , who last Friday withdrew a transfer request , scored the equaliser and generally did his bit to rally the troops .
3074	European Football : Maradona 's restoration period
3075	By PHIL SHAW
3076	THE FORM book proved a poor guide yesterday when Napoli , who stumbled into the UEFA Cup 's second round in midweek on penalties , won 3-0 against Milan , who had breezed through their first defence of the European Cup , writes Phil Shaw .
3077	Internazionale shrugged off defeat by Malmo to beat the leaders , Roma , also by 3-0 .
3078	as if to underline the point , Malmo completed their regular season by losing 2-0 to relegated Vastra Frolunda , although they now play off for the Swedish title with Norrkoping .
3079	Diego Maradona did most to restore Napoli to the top , creating headed goals ( 18 and 45 min ) for Andrea Carnevale and scoring a virtuoso third ( 84 ) .
3080	Inter 's treble came from Lothar Matthaus ( 26 , 39 ) and Andreas Brehme ( 51 ) .
3081	In Spain Real Madrid now lead on goal difference from Atletico Madrid and Sevilla after a 4-1 win over Cadiz , Hugo Sanchez scoring two and Bernd Schuster one .
3082	Basque nationalism surfaced during Athletic Bilbao 's match against Atletico .
3083	Demonstrators invaded the pitch , but they were repelled and play continued .
3084	At half-time a giant Spanish flag was burned , and Atletico sent on Paolo Futre .
3085	He made a goal ( 65 ) for Baltazar , but Howard Kendall 's side equalised ( 70 ) .
3086	Football : Palace rise above Everton 's kneading
3087	By JONATHAN FOSTER
3088	Crystal Palace .... 2 Everton ........... 1 LIKE other Merseyside institutions before them , Everton can find scapegoats on their own left wing .
3089	Passes played into space there created a two-goal , first-half deficit , which the patient patterns Everton built down their right flank ultimately merited to cancel : a team , in fact , of two halves .
3090	The sinister side included Norman Whiteside , still short of full fitness and substituted after his irritability got him booked , and the right-footed Neil McDonald , an obviously uncomfortable deputy at left-back for Neil ‘ Disser ’ Pointon .
3091	So the thrust of Everton movement was provided down the other side by Ian Snodin and Stuart McCall , to such effect during the second half that Steve Coppell , the Crystal Palace manager , likened the impression on his defence to kneading dough .
3092	Maybe , but Palace were nothing if not doughty .
3093	Geoff Thomas , a makeshift centre-back , put head , toes and abdomen to the ball in exemplary manner , and Andy Gray 's defending was even more impressive than the passes he timed to perfection for both Palace goals .
3094	The first was simple , after Gray had intercepted some sloppy play and sent Mark Bright through : goalkeeper Neville Southall parried the shot , but Ian Wright converted his fourth League goal of the season .
3095	The second was altogether more clever : McDonald isolated and an offside trap jammed by a pass that Alan Pardew collected before shooting diagonally past Southall .
3096	By then , the game was set in an exciting crescendo , Palace interrupting the openings contrived down the right by Mike Newell and Pat Nevin with breaks aimed at Wright 's speed and control .
3097	Wright looked acclimatised to the First Division , more so than his partner Bright , who has yet to score this season .
3098	Newell has also arrived impressively from the Second and took his goal with poise .
3099	Football : Bassett hounded by comparisons
3100	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3101	Sunderland .......... 1 Sheffield United .... 1 WHAT gets up Dave Bassett 's nostrils , as he so vividly put it after his side 's draw at Roker Park , are the people who make comparisons between Sheffield United and his former club , Wimbledon .
3102	‘ It 's not the Wimbledon style of play with us , it 's the Sheffield style .
3103	You have to play according to the players you 've got , ’ he said .
3104	All the same it is hard to resist the temptation to describe United 's style as Wimbledon Mk II .
3105	For a start , you have goalkeeper Simon Tracey , signed from Wimbledon last year .
3106	He regularly plays the ball outside the 18-yard area before kicking it upfield .
3107	Where did he learn that move ?
3108	At the heart of the defence is Mark Morris , a first-team regular with the Dons for seven years .
3109	Then there is John Gannon in midfield .
3110	He was six years with Wimbledon .
3111	It does not really matter how you describe the style — Wimbledon , long ball , direct .
3112	The fact is , it works and it has taken United to the top of the Second Division , unbeaten in nine League games .
3113	Sunderland were handed an early goal by Brian Deane who headed Gordon Armstrong 's inswinging corner high into his own net .
3114	United completed the scoreline after 19 minutes through an Ian Bryson header .
3115	Sport in Short : Volleyball
3116	Sport Page 28
3117	Sport in Short : Tennis
3118	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3119	THE unseeded Anders Jarryd of Sweden overcame a shaky start to beat fifth-seeded Kevin Curren in the semi-finals of the San Francisco Grand Prix tournament .
3120	Jarryd won 3-6 7-6 7-5 in 2hr 37min and now plays Brad Gilbert .
3121	THE All England Club chairman , R E H ‘ Buzzer ’ Hadingham , 73 , is to step down in December after six years in charge of Wimbledon .
3122	JOHN McENROE and Michael Chang head the entries for the grand prix tournament at Wembley on 7-12 November .
3123	Revised first-round draw : Italy v New Zealand ; Soviet Union v Switzerland ; Canada v Brazil ; Spain v France ; United States v Greece ; Czechoslovakia v Belgium ; Sweden v Japan ; West Germany v Finland ; Australia v China ; Argentina v Philippines ; Bulgaria v South Korea ; Netherlands v Yugoslavia ; Denmark v Poland ; Britain v Indonesia ; Austria v Mexico ; Hungary v Thailand .
3124	Sport in Short : Swimming
3125	Sport Page 28
3126	Sport in Short : Squash
3127	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3128	STAFFORD MURRAY , 19 days short of his 14th birthday , became the youngest winner of a senior county closed championship at the Leominster Leisure Centre , Herefordshire , yesterday when he defeated his coach , Peter Ratcliffe , 9-5 , 9-7 , 9-2 in the final .
3129	Sport in Short : Speedway
3130	Sport Page 28
3131	Sport in Short : Snooker
3132	Sport Page 28
3133	Sport in Short : Sailing
3134	Sport Page 28
3135	Sport in Short : Rowing
3136	Sport Page 28
3137	Sport in Short : Rhythmic Gymnastics
3138	Sport Page 28
3139	Sport in Short : Rallying
3140	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3141	JIMMY McCRAE , of Scotland , won the 2,200-mile round-Britain Autoglass Tour by 22 minutes at Brands Hatch yesterday when he finished second to Wales 's David Llewellin in the final stage .
3142	Sport in Short : Olympics
3143	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3144	THE SPORTS COUNCIL is to support Manchester 's bid to host the 1996 summer Games by giving the city £50,000 towards staging 15 major sports events .
3145	They will include the English Open table tennis tournament , the women 's world and European weightlifting championships and the British and European 10m airgun championships .
3146	Sport in Short : Motor Racing
3147	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3148	DICK JOHNSON and John Bowe of Australia , in a Ford Sierra , led from the start yesterday to win the Bathurst 1,000-km touring car race from the West German pair of Klaus Niedzwiedz and Frank Biela , in another Ford Sierra .
3149	Sport in Short : Golf
3150	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3151	BILL BRITTON won his first PGA Tournament without hitting a ball yesterday when the final round of the $750,000 Tallahassee Classic was rained out .
3152	Sport in Short : Cycling
3153	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3154	JEANNIE LONGO , of France , beat her own world 10km and 20km records and her one-hour high-altitude record yesterday .
3155	Longo , a triple gold medallist at this year 's world championships , clocked 12hr 59min 50sec in the 10km , 25:59.96 in the 20km and covered 46.35268km in one hour .
3156	Sport in Short : Cricket
3157	Sport Page 28
3158	Sport in Short : Boxing
3159	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3160	JESUS ROJAS , of Venezuela , won the World Boxing Association flyweight title from Fidel Bassa , of Colombia , after 12 rugged rounds in front of the champion 's home crowd , in Barranquilla , on Saturday night .
3161	Sport in Short : Bowls
3162	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3163	SCOTLAND scored a crushing 20-5 victory over England in the Players ' Association international at Carlisle .
3164	The Scots , who led 12-3 overnight , needed only one more point to secure overall victory and clinched it in the first match to finish yesterday when Jim Muir beat Mike Marsden in straight sets .
3165	Two Scots , Willie Wood and Hugh Duff , finished with 100 per cent records from their five matches .
3166	Sport in Short : Baseball
3167	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3168	GEORGE BELL drove in the last of three runs in the eighth inning as the Toronto Blue Jays came from behind for a 4-3 victory over the Baltimore Orioles in the SkyDome on Saturday and reached the American League championship series against the Oakland Athletics .
3169	The first game of the best-of-seven series between the winners of the West and East divisions will be in California tomorrow .
3170	Sport in Short : Badminton
3171	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3172	ALLAN BUDI KUSUMA , thriving on the confidence gleaned from his victory over Denmark 's world No. 1 , Morten Frost , in the semi-finals , beat fellow Indonesian Eddy Kurniawan 15-7 15-12 to win the Dutch men 's open title and move to the top of the world rankings .
3173	Sport in Short : Athletics
3174	By JOHN DOUGRAY
3175	DOUGLAS WAKIIHURI , Kenya 's premier marathon runner , took the lead after 10km of the 30km Lidingoloppet in Sweden and won the world 's largest cross-country festival by two minutes .
3176	Britain 's Angela Tooby broke 4km from the finish to win the women 's 15km race .
3177	ROSA MOTA , Portugal 's Olympic women 's marathon champion , won a 10-kilometre race in a suburban Tokyo park , in 32min 31sec .
3178	Sport in Short : American Football
3179	Sport Page 28
3180	Rugby League Round-Up : Eagles making a soar point
3181	By PHIL SHAW
3182	THE FORTUNES of two clubs who joined the League together during the summer of 1984 could hardly be more contrasting .
3183	Sheffield Eagles ' fortunes are soaring in the top flight ; the 28-16 win at Wakefield was their third in four matches .
3184	They came from 14-2 down at the break , and Trinity 's failure was compounded by the sending off of Mark Conway .
3185	Nottingham City , originally named Mansfield Marksman after a lager , remain marooned in the depths of the Second Division .
3186	They led Halifax 8-4 at half-time only to collapse , punch-drunk , to a 72-20 defeat .
3187	The only consolation was a crowd at the Harvey Hadden Stadium of 2,581 , boosted by visiting fans .
3188	In a bad-tempered match , Jason Ramshaw , the Halifax hooker , had his jaw broken , while his team-mate Richard Fairbank and Nottingham 's Craig Whitehead were sent off .
3189	Remarkably , Halifax 's performance meant that the First Division leaders Wigan , 66-0 winners in a 12-try romp at Barrow , were not the day 's top scorers .
3190	Steve Clayton 's eighth-minute dismissal for tripping hardly enhanced the home team 's prospects .
3191	Hull ended their four-game losing streak by beating Leeds 8-7 at The Boulevard .
3192	Richard Gay , their teenage stand-off , set up the decisive try as Hull came from 7-4 behind in the closing minutes .
3193	There were calls for the resignation of coach Kevin Ashcroft as Salford went down to another heavy defeat , 36-12 at home to a Bradford side inspired by their Canberra Raider , Ivan Henjak .
3194	Three players were banished at Workington — Dave Lowden and Paul Penrice of the home side and Basil Akey from runaway winners Ryedale York .
3195	Resurgent Fulham , home from Hendon , overran Carlisle 50-6 at Chiswick .
3196	Hockey : Holwell quickly sets ball rolling
3197	By BILL COLWILL
3198	SUE HOLWELL , the England sweeper , had the honour of scoring the first goal in the Women 's Typhoo National League when it got underway on Saturday .
3199	In an early-start game her goal after seven minutes from a penalty corner set Leicester on their way to a 2-1 win against Exmouth .
3200	Holwell got a second after the interval with the Exmouth captain , Rosie Goodridge , pulling one back in the last minute .
3201	Chris Lysons , Great Harwood 's goalkeeper , will remember her first National League game for different reasons .
3202	Against Slough , she saved a penalty stroke from Karen Brown but was beaten six times — twice by Brown and twice by another GB striker , Kate Parker , the Slough captain , with further goals coming from Lesley Hobley and Sue Chandler , Slough 's latest recruit .
3203	Ealing were quickly into action in their game against Orpington , with Jane Jagger opening the scoring in the second minute following a brilliant move involving Joan Lewis and Mandy Langridge .
3204	Lewis and Langridge added further goals before the interval with Anne Green and Andrea Gallyer completing the scoring in the second half for a convincing 5-0 win .
3205	To complete an opening day which was lacking in surprises , Sutton Coldfield won 2-0 away at Chelmsford with goals from Jane Swinnerton and Sian Jones .
3206	Meanwhile , Hightown were 3-0 winners against Clifton on the Bristol University ground .
3207	Their goals were scored by Jackie Crook , Sue Jones and Maggie Souyave , England 's former indoor captain .
3208	A game with a difference took place at Wimbledon , the oldest women 's club in the world , as part of their centenary celebrations — a costume game between a side representing the pioneers of the club and one representing the swinging Thirties .
3209	Hockey : Hacker to the four
3210	By BILL COLWILL
3211	Wales .... 4 Italy .... 0 WALES 'S men extended their unbeaten run to seven matches yesterday when they defeated Italy at the National Sports Centre , Cardiff , writes Bill Colwill .
3212	This followed their 2-0 win over the Italians on Saturday .
3213	Hounslow 's David Hacker , who got both goals in the first match , opened the scoring yesterday after 10 minutes as Wales established quick control .
3214	Hacker and his Hounslow club-mate , Jon Rees , were in dominant form in the Wales midfield , putting the Italian defence under constant pressure and it came as no surprise when Owen Mackney put Wales further ahead on the half hour .
3215	Hacker put the match beyond doubt two minutes after the interval with his second strike , although Jeremy Fry in the Welsh goal was called upon to make two smart saves before , in the last minute , Mark Lewis , one of only two home-based Welsh players in the side , sent Antony Colclough away for the final goal .
3216	As Welsh hockey moves up a step and they prepare for their European Cup qualifier next year , their next games are against Belgium at Newtown at the end of the month .
3217	They will be more than grateful to the English Poundstretcher League for the experience being gained by 13 of their 16-man squad .
3218	Tennis : Jones fears second lightning bolt
3219	From Our Correspondent in Tokyo
3220	WHEN Sara Gomer , Clare Wood and Julie Salmon collapsed to a 2-1 defeat to Indonesia in the first round of the Federation Cup in Melbourne last December , they were the laughing stock of the tennis world , writes our correspondent from Tokyo .
3221	Tomorrow at the sprawling Ariake Tennis Centre here a changed , but not new , British team will face the same opponents , desperate to restore some of their lost pride .
3222	Wood remains , but Jo Durie replaces Gomer while Anne Hobbs will take over from Salmon .
3223	Although last year 's result shocked most people in the sport the British team captain , Ann Jones , claims she was not among them and therefore she had a firm eve-of-play warning for her players .
3224	‘ I have told them not to think that lightning ca n't strike twice , ’ the former Wimbledon champion said .
3225	‘ I have been in tennis long enough to know that it can .
3226	It is nice that we can play them again so soon , but since last year I think they have improved . ’
3227	Jones based her judgement on the fact that yesterday Indonesia crushed Malaysia in the qualifying round , losing just two games in their 3-0 win .
3228	In many eyes , Britain could leave Tokyo as winners anyway .
3229	In yesterday 's opening ceremony they wore one of the most striking two-piece outfits which put them in the running for the ‘ elegance ’ award for the best dressed team .
3230	The award will be presented tomorrow night .
3231	The Soviet team had a go , too .
3232	They marched into the stadium in matching denim jackets , mini-skirts ( which were brought into the country by the US team captain , Marty Reissen ) and dark glasses .
3233	The most notable absentees were Martina Navratilova and Chris Evert , who will arrive today after playing an exhibition in Philadelphia , and Gabriela Sabatini and Monica Seles , who withdrew because they were too tired .
3234	Bodybuilding : Charlie rules on pure flex appeal : Joe Lovejoy enters the oily domain of the muscled where Surrey 's incredible hulk uncovers a universal truth
3235	By JOE LOVEJOY
3236	MR UNIVERSE will gird up his loins in briefs which bring a new meaning to the term bikini line , clip his diamond ear-stud into place and take the rattler from his Guildford home to Luton this week to begin his reign by promoting a new range of office furniture .
3237	‘ Strong and reliable stuff , see .
3238	A good tie-up and a nice little earner . ’
3239	‘ Earners ’ like these keep Charles Clairmonte 's body and soul together — no small task when the body in question is 17 stones of unadulterated muscle .
3240	The 31-year-old ex-paratrooper 's prize for retaining his title at Wembley on Saturday night was £10,000 , which does not go far for a full-time body builder who downs half a dozen eggs after his breakfast cereal and eight to 10 chicken breasts a day when ‘ bulking up ’ .
3241	Charlie 's weekly food bill comes to rather more than £100 .
3242	In his amateur days he was an ‘ eviction technician ’ ( a fashionable euphemism for bouncer ) but such work is regarded as unseemly for the standard bearer of a sport which prides itself in its healthy clean-living image , and he now supplements his income from the few competitions which pay more than a pittance by personal appearances .
3243	Clairmonte was a popular choice for the title first won by John Carl Grimek , America 's ‘ Monarch of Muscledom ’ back in 1948 , but his victory had been a close run thing .
3244	Edward Kawak , who won in four successive years ( 1982-1985 ) , mysteriously representing France , Lebanon and West Germany , was too close for comfort in second place ( he was French this time ) .
3245	Out in the audience it was bedlam , each Rodin pose greeted with wolf whistles , cat calls and enough indecent suggestions and doubles entendres to script a new ‘ Carry On ’ series .
3246	Pecs mad , this body building lot .
3247	Out on the stairs a piece of paper as worthless as Chamberlain 's prohibited the use of body oils .
3248	Back stage was like the Costa Brava : everyone oiling themselves and each other .
3249	If they had all gone for a midnight swim , we would have had the worst slick since the Torrey Canyon .
3250	What were they using if not the stuff Johnson intended for babies ' bums ?
3251	‘ You do n't expect me to give away the tricks of the trade , do you ? ’ snapped Casey Kucharyk , who was to win Amateur Class II ( up to 5ft 9in ) .
3252	Sorry , Casey — the secret 's out .
3253	The colour and smell were a giveaway .
3254	The magic potion was nothing more sinister than Hawaiian Tropic sun tan oil .
3255	Upstairs in the Hampton Room Kawak was preening and strutting his stuff with a worried frown , pondering perhaps in which language to prepare a winner 's speech .
3256	Tatyana Scholl , the West German who was to win the Miss Bikini ( physique ) class , took time out from her press-ups to waddle around nervously like a weight-lifter eyeing the bar .
3257	Someone suggested she touch up her lipstick , but make-up only made her look more than ever like the Spitting Image puppet of Bette Midler .
3258	There were two classes for the ladies : Miss Bikini ( figure ) , which was like Miss World without the breasts ( pumping iron , paradoxically , serves only to deflate them ) and Miss Bikini ( physique ) in which the girls resemble scaled-down versions of the men , without the knobbly bits .
3259	Tatyana the Terrible won the Amazons ' title , our own Tracey Citrone the more aesthetic section .
3260	Charlie Clairmonte was the real winner , though — the one the highlighted products of London 's solariums wanted to be photographed with .
3261	How had he first got into body building ?
3262	‘ By reading super hero comics , ’ Flash Charlie said .
3263	Surrey 's own incredible hulk is available for personal appearances .
3264	The odd chicken or a carrot cake would be much appreciated .
3265	Sailing : Soviets slide to seventh place
3266	By STUART ALEXANDER
3267	BY a margin of two minutes 40 seconds the Soviet yacht Fazisi , with co-skippers Alexei Gryshenko and the American Skip Novak , finished sixth in the first leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race to Punta del Este , Uruguay .
3268	But , by the even narrower margin of 38 seconds after handicap correction , they had to concede the place to Italy 's Gatorade .
3269	Both had finished just over six hours behind the Swedish ketch The Card with Pelle Petterson in the crew .
3270	All agreed that the tactical decision on whether to go east or west at Cape Finisterre had been the key to success .
3271	Half the fleet had arrived by last night , including the joint services yacht Satquote British Defender , which was beaten for eighth place by only 37 minutes by the first of the three Finnish challengers , Martela OF .
3272	Defender also had the distinction of having the first woman finisher , Mandy Gallow .
3273	Then , in the space of 31 minutes , came Spain 's Fortuna Extra Lights , France 's Charles Jourdan and the second Finnish maxi , Belmont .
3274	Ireland 's NCB and the third Finnish challenger , UBF , were due in last night .
3275	Snooker : Top spot for Davis
3276	By JANICE HALE
3277	STEVE DAVIS might have begun his season behind the other players but he started it in style by capturing the first British ranking event , the BCE International , when beating Stephen Hendry , his most obvious rival , 9-4 at Trentham Gardens , Stoke , writes Janice Hale .
3278	Davis , who won the world title for the sixth time in May , decided not to compete in the first two ranking events in Hong Hong and Bangkok .
3279	He also did not compete in the European Open and will be absent from the Dubai Classic , which are also ranking events .
3280	Consequently , after the Asian Open — which Hendry won — his No. 1 position in the world was taken over briefly by the 20-year-old Scot .
3281	But his victory at Stoke on Saturday has him back at the top of the list .
3282	He had only won one match prior to the international , in the Regal Scottish Masters , but is well aware of his own capabilities .
3283	‘ I raised my game just enough to get through the early rounds , ’ he said of his performance .
3284	‘ It was a hell of a standard and an enormous challenge .
3285	It stretched you to the limit .
3286	I love playing great players and he 's ( Hendry ) a great player . ’
3287	Equestrianism : Whitaker in search of rich picking
3288	By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
3289	IF John Whitaker can repeat last year 's form at The Horse of the Year Show , which begins today at Wembley Arena , he will be the taker of rather more than a whit .
3290	He won five of the 1988 contests and a total of £42,399 , writes Genevieve Murphy .
3291	Whitaker , the European champion , rides the same three horses as last year — Next Milton , Gammon and Hopscotch .
3292	Milton 's three 1988 victories included the winner-takes-all prize of £25,000 in the first running of the Next International Masters , which will be staged again on Friday evening .
3293	This evening 's opening performance begins with the final of the first Olympic Star Spotters Championship , which aims to give riders of young horses the chance to test their potential stars .
3294	The idea has been warmly welcomed by David Broome , who has qualified Paul Schockemohle 's seven-year-old Lotus for this evening 's contest .
3295	New Zealand 's dual Olympic three-day event champion , Mark Todd , will also be in action on his latest Kiwi import , Double Take .
3296	Squash : Parke 's pay-off
3297	From RICHARD EATON in Kuala Lumpur
3298	SIMON PARKE , whose selection for England in the World Championships was dogged by controversy , began to repay the selectors ' faith as he beat the Canadian No. 1 , Sabir Butt , and the effects of influenza here yesterday , writes Richard Eaton from Kuala Lumpur .
3299	Parke , 17 , needed all his creativity and courage to hold on for a 15-10 , 9-15 , 15-12 , 15-14 victory just when his resources were beginning to flag .
3300	It was the Yorkshireman 's second win in two days and his reward was to move within one win of a place in the last 32 .
3301	Another English selection for the team event , Jason Nicolle , the British Under-23 champion , also came through , winning 15-9 , 15-11 , 17-15 against Florian Possl , the West German who recently beat the England No. 1 Del Harris in New Zealand .
3302	However , the Australian Geoff Hunt , joint holder of the record of eight British Open titles , just failed to make it .
3303	He lost the toughest tussle of the day , against another former world champion , Maqsood Ahmed .
3304	Hunt went down 15-9 , 15-17 , 15-13 , 8-15 , 15-5 .
3305	The Pakistani today plays the former British champion Geoff Williams for a place in the main draw .
3306	Racing : The Trainers and Jockeys Making The Running on The Flat
3307	Sport Page 29
3308	Racing : Slippers comforts Sangster : Changing fortunes for a former leading owner and changing jockeys for Europe 's richest race
3309	By JOHN KARTER
3310	OIL RICH beats filthy rich every time , but after several years of battling to remain buoyant in the remorseless wake of the Maktoums , Robert Sangster clambered back on to terra firma with his most significant win for a long time in Saturday 's Hoover Fillies ' Mile at Ascot .
3311	Silk Slippers enabled Sangster — slowly-sinking in the super league of owners — to regain a foothold by wearing down the red-hot favourite , Moon Cactus , owned ironically by Sheikh Mohammed , in the dying strides of an event that has become a fertile proving ground for Classic fillies .
3312	What a difference a few precious centimetres can make in this game of high stakes .
3313	On both her outings Silk Slippers has thrust her attractive nose in front just where it matters and in so doing has established herself not merely as a valuable stud prospect , but an exciting candidate for next year 's 1,000 Guineas and Oaks .
3314	Sangster had been leading owner in this country five times in eight years up to 1985 when Sheikh Mohammed led the Maktoum charge , taking the No. 1 spot four times in row in the past four seasons .
3315	And the Sheikh 's dominance has been maintained this year as he heads the table with some £1.75m in prize money , half a million ahead of his older brother , Hamdan Al Maktoum , who owns Nashwan , with Sangster languishing in 10th place with a mere £250,000 or so in the kitty .
3316	Silk Slippers may not enable Sangster to challenge the Arab supremacy , but an English Classic success after a five-year gap would come like manna from heaven .
3317	Silk Slippers certainly looks the part , being a staying filly with speed in the mould of Midway Lady , who took the 1,000 and Oaks three years ago .
3318	What was so impressive about Silk Slippers 's victory was that she twice had to overcome difficulties in running and William Hill 's offer of 33-1 about the daughter of Nureyev for the Oaks is particularly tempting .
3319	She certainly looks a more attractive three-year-old prospect than Digression , who won the big juvenile colts ' event , the Royal Lodge Stakes .
3320	Digression won well enough , but the big minus factor against him is the fact that he is by the American stallion , Seattle Slew , whose progeny have tended not to train on over here .
3321	Sheikh Mohammed 's Bridal Toast , who finished powerfully to take second place could have more scope to progress as a Derby contender .
3322	Fascinating though they are , thoughts of Classic confrontations to come were put on to the back-burner by another dazzling performance from Zilzal , who stamped himself as one of the outstanding milers of recent years with a thrashing of the French champion , Polish Precedent .
3323	Walter Swinburn finds it hard to believe Zilzal will ever be beaten and the son of Nureyev will attempt to extend his sequence to six out of six in next month 's Breeders ' Cup Mile in Florida .
3324	The good news is that he will not be rushed off to stud afterwards and will campaign for further honours next year when a move up to a mile and a quarter might be considered .
3325	Meanwhile , as Ladbrokes shortened Nashwan 's odds for next Sunday 's Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe from 2-1 to 7-4 with a run , French Glory came down a point to 7-1 amid rumours that Pat Eddery would switch to him from Khalid Abdullah 's other probable runner , Assatis .
3326	Even more intriguing was a strong rumour that Steve Cauthen is to replace Greville Starkey on Cacoethes , who is trained like Assatis by Guy Harwood .
3327	Starkey said yesterday that he knew nothing of the move and as far as he was concerned he was still on Cacoethes .
3328	‘ I shall sleep easy tonight , ’ Starkey said .
3329	Willie Carson will also resting easy after suggestions that he had been wrong to bring about the withdrawal of the red-hot favourite , Superoo , before the start of Ascot 's opening event on Saturday , having done a similar thing with the favourite , Red Paddy , before the Royal Hunt Cup .
3330	‘ I was angry for a while because I was confident that the horse would win , but Willie did the right thing , ’ John Sutcliffe , Superoo 's trainer , said yesterday .
3331	‘ It 's true the horse was 100 per cent sound five minutes afterwards , but there was definitely something wrong down at the start and Willie had advice from the starter and a vet . ’
3332	Racing : For the Notebook
3333	By JOHN KARTER
3334	A weekly list of horses to follow HUFOOF : Had her stands-side rivals beaten in a 24-runner sprint at Haydock on Saturday but was kept out of the frame by the finishers on the far side of the track .
3335	Coming back to winning form .
3336	( H Thomson Jones ) .
3337	KATAHDIN : Unplaced behind Triomphe Modest over 6 furlongs at Nottingham on Tuesday , but this colt was not given a punishing race when running on very well to finish only a few lengths off the winner .
3338	Will do better over longer distances .
3339	( G Wragg ) .
3340	SHIELING : Ran a marvellous race under a sizeable burden behind Kiya at Ascot .
3341	She looked the possible winner a furlong from home , but faded near the finish as the task of conceding so much weight told .
3342	( L Cumani ) .
3343	TAILSPIN : Looked likely to be unplaced in Double Dutch 's race at Ascot , but finished powerfully to take third place and must be followed in similar company .
3344	( B Hills ) .
3345	Pope rejects Runcie 's vision of church leadership
3346	From ANDREW BROWN , Religious Affairs Correspondent , in Rome
3347	THE ARCHBISHOP of Canterbury , Dr Robert Runcie , exchanged a symbolic kiss of peace with Pope John Paul II yesterday at a mass attended by thousands in St Peter 's Square , Rome .
3348	But Dr Runcie 's ideas of a limited primacy — recognising the Pope as a central figure in the Christian Church , who would exercise ‘ a primacy for the sake of unity and mission ’ — have been rejected as insufficient by the Pope .
3349	They have also aroused Protestant anger against Dr Runcie , at the same time as he has become involved in a row over his attack on the ‘ Pharisees ’ of British society .
3350	Though Dr Runcie and his party could not take Holy Communion at the papal mass , he had earlier celebrated the eucharist at the Anglican church in Rome after three demonstrators rose from the congregation as he ascended the pulpit ; the visit has been dogged by protests from supporters of the Rev Ian Paisley .
3351	In his sermon , Dr Runcie said : ‘ We should ever recognise the scandal that Anglicans and Roman Catholics must celebrate two eucharists to make one memorial of our redemption on the day of our Lord . ’
3352	Dr Runcie has gone out of his way on this visit to concede many of the doctrinal points and practices which large elements of the Church of England have traditionally found offensive in Roman Catholicism .
3353	The Pope , too , has spoken warmly of unity .
3354	On Saturday the two prelates attended a service of vespers at the Church of San Gregorio , which stands on the site where Pope Gregory sent St Augustine of Canterbury off to become the first Archbishop of Canterbury in 597 .
3355	But in their prepared homilies the Pope and the Archbishop addressed quite different problems .
3356	Dr Runcie repeated his offer of a limited primacy , involving the limited powers exercised by the popes in the first few centuries of the Christian Church .
3357	However , the Pope 's account of the role of the papacy went a great deal farther than that : Christian unity , he said , must be founded on the faith in Christ that was handed on by the Apostles ; what this faith is must be determined by the Roman Catholic Church .
3358	He quoted the Second Vatican Council : ‘ The task of giving an authentic interpretation of the Word of God … has been entrusted to the living teaching office of the Church alone .
3359	The specific role of bishops which is to be exercised in communion with the see of Peter in ensuring the unity and continuity of the faith is vital if we are to hand on the faith of Peter , Gregory and Augustine .
3360	All our efforts to restore unity among Christians will be in vain if they are not carried out in total fidelity to the faith in Christ … handed on by the Apostles . ’
3361	In a statement afterwards Dr Runcie stressed that he was not proposing any change in the British constitution .
3362	‘ The phrase ‘ universal primacy ’ has a spiritual meaning .
3363	It does not imply political supremacy , and does not suggest that the Pope should administer the affairs of the Church of England , ’ he said .
3364	Both prelates referred to the consecration in February of the Rt Rev Barbara Harris as the Anglican Assistant Bishop of Massachussetts .
3365	Bishop Harris is quite unacceptable to the Vatican .
3366	The Pope said : ‘ Events in recent years have seriously aggravated the differences between us . ’
3367	The Independent has learnt that 1,800 American Roman Catholic nuns wrote last winter to Dr Runcie , urging him to defy the Pope over the ordination of women .
3368	Sister Margaret Traxler , of the National Coalition of American Nuns , said that she had told Dr Runcie : ‘ The Roman Catholic Church says this is a deterrent to unity ; but we say , how can this be a deterrent to unity when discrimination against women is evil ? ’
3369	She said she had received a ‘ friendly and brotherly ’ reply from Dr Runcie .
3370	East Germany lets 7,000 take the train west : More refugees join queue to escape through Prague and Warsaw embassies after cave-in by Berlin
3371	From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn and EDWARD LUCAS in Prague
3372	AS SOME 7,000 exhausted but happy East Germans arrived in West Germany on special trains early yesterday , hundreds who missed the trains joined the queue to go west at embassies in Prague and Warsaw .
3373	In Prague last night , more than 200 were allowed into the West German embassy after spending the day on the pavement outside .
3374	Most arrived in the morning , some only minutes after Czechoslovak police sealed off the building .
3375	The West German Ambassador , Hermann Huber , who earlier in the day told the new arrivals the transfer of 4,000 to West Germany was a ‘ one-off action ’ , appeared again to tell them : ‘ For the time being we are letting you in . ’
3376	Hans-Dietrich Genscher , the West German Foreign Minister , went on television to say he hoped for a ‘ parallel solution ’ for the new arrivals .
3377	In Warsaw , dozens of East Germans were last night waiting in front of the embassy , filling out forms and wondering where they would spend the night .
3378	As the East German trains pulled into the border station of Hof the first refugees , many of them in tears , were greeted with cheers , applause and a local youth group singing the Beatles song ‘ Let It Be ’ .
3379	They were welcomed by government officals , Red Cross teams with hot tea , soup and nappies , and local people with clothes and toys .
3380	Doctors had been deeply worried about the 4,000 refugees from Prague , who had been camping in the embassy grounds in squalid conditions , surrounded by ankle-deep mud and sleeping in shifts on the available beds .
3381	They were quickly sent on to reception camps .
3382	Yesterday 's sudden departure followed what appeared to have been an almost total cave-in by East Germany , anxious to have the matter out of the way by the country 's fortieth anniversary on Saturday .
3383	All but about 300 of the East Germans had flatly refused an offer of guaranteed permission to go to the West providing they returned to East Germany first .
3384	So , under what appeared to be an informal deal between Bonn , Berlin , Prague and Warsaw , the special trains passed through East German territory on the way out — but with senior West German officials on board as a guarantee .
3385	Soon afterwards the embassy in Prague was sealed off unilaterally by Czechoslovak police .
3386	This prompted the Foreign Ministry in Bonn to lodge a protest with the Czechoslovak ambassador .
3387	Last night , the East German Foreign Ministry issued a statement attacking the attitude of the refugees : ‘ Some East German citizens will justifiably ask why we let these people emigrate to West Germany via East Germany , even though they had grossly violated our laws , ’ said the statement read as the main television news item .
3388	‘ Among these people there are anti-social elements who have a bad attitude to work and also to normal living conditions . ’
3389	Earlier , East Germany had announced the solution as a ‘ humanitarian act ’ by the government , adding that it hoped Bonn in future would run its embassies ‘ in normal manner according to international usage ’ .
3390	West Germany had expected around 5,000 refugees — including 809 from Warsaw , who arrived in Helmstedt — but more kept pouring from the special trains .
3391	Hundreds had evidently gone straight to the station in Prague without contacting the embassy .
3392	There were also reports that some had jumped on the trains as they passed through East Germany , or that the numbers could have included previously uncounted children .
3393	Another 735 East Germans arrived by way of Hungary and Austria , bringing to 31,000 the total of East Germans who have come out since Hungary opened its borders on 11 September .
3394	‘ The journey through East Germany was terrible , ’ one woman said yesterday .
3395	She feared a trap when the train stopped for 45 minutes on the way .
3396	It turned out that East German security merely wanted to take away their identity cards so they could be formally ‘ expelled ’ .
3397	At the Prague embassy on Saturday night , cheers greeted the news that the refugees would be leaving the same night as Mr Genscher .
3398	Mr Genscher , who appears to have arranged the solution in talks with his East German , Czechoslovak and Polish counterparts in the United Nations , said his trip to Prague was the most moving of his career .
3399	The refugees were the same age as he was when he escaped from East Germany 37 years ago .
3400	In his special broadcast last night , Mr Genscher said he hoped President Gorbachev , who will visit East Berlin for the anniversary this weekend , ‘ will try to convince East Germany that political reforms are also in its own interest ’ .
3401	Labour ‘ would keep tight rein on spending ’
3402	By ANTHONY BEVINS , Political Editor
3403	JOHN SMITH , the shadow Chancellor , yesterday set the overriding tone for this week 's Labour Party conference with a warning that he would impose tough spending controls if Labour won the next election .
3404	His warning casts doubt on Labour 's commitment to increase spending on ‘ priority ’ programmes for the health service and pensions .
3405	Mr Smith said in an interview on BBC television 's On the Record that he did not expect his colleagues to ‘ spend and spend again' when they took office .
3406	He conceded that there would be disputes with colleagues , but said : ‘ There are no quick fixes , and I will not be indulging in any quick fix .
3407	A quick fix clearly becomes unfixed .
3408	There are realities that I can not change .
3409	There will be the reality of the economic situation which we inherit , which will not be our fault , but it will be our responsibility .
3410	When we 've got an economic mess , the first duty of a government is to clear up the economic mess .
3411	‘ Now if that means we have to postpone some of our social ambitions , then we may have to do so .
3412	But it will not mean that we are abandoning them .
3413	We will tackle putting our economy in order so that we can achieve that social ambition , so that the strong economy is used to finance and develop the fair society . ’
3414	As for his colleagues , Mr Smith said : ‘ We 're all agreed that we can not spend what we have not earned and we intend to earn it before we spend it .
3415	That will be the guiding light of the next Labour government .
3416	When I insist on that priority , as I can tell you I most certainly will — with the full support of the Prime Minister in doing so — then I 'm sure my colleagues will see the point of that .
3417	‘ Now it is quite right of them , of course , to allow our social obligations not to be forgotten ; there 'll probably be an argument .
3418	There are in all governments between the Treasury and spending ministers .
3419	But they will take into account the need for that balance that says that social spending without underpinning by economic growth will not be sustained in any event . ’
3420	Mr Smith 's warning coincided with a call by Ken Livingstone , the Labour MP for Brent East , who said on London Weekend Television 's The Walden Interview : ‘ You can be miles ahead in the polls , but when you get to the last three weeks , people think , ‘ Can I afford a Labour government ? ’
3421	We need to say now what we are going to spend : where the money is going to come from . ’
3422	Mr Livingstone called for cuts in defence spending .
3423	David Blunkett , another member of the national executive , told a conference fringe rally organised by the soft-left Labour Coordinating Committee that Labour would have to find additional funds for its social programme by cutting £9.5bn from defence spending over five years , and raising the level of taxation on the rich .
3424	The policy review 's top rate of income tax - 50 per cent — was too low , he said .
3425	Although the policy review will be endorsed by the conference , giving Neil Kinnock the freedom to go on to the offensive against the Conservatives in the run-up to the next general election , there are a number of areas of potential conflict .
3426	Calls for consideration of electoral reform and a new form of black representation are both expected to be defeated .
3427	Ron Todd , the general secretary of the transport workers ' union , said that today 's vote on the multilaterist nuclear defence policy would not yield the ‘ massive and overwhelming ’ majority predicted by right-wingers , and he warned that party leaders could not expect everybody to ‘ goose-step ’ in the same direction once the policy had been carried .
3428	The conference opened with Labour buoyed by a series of weekend opinion polls giving leads of from 5 to 12 points .
3429	Soviet Union faces serious energy shortage
3430	From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
3431	AN OMINOUS combination of industrial unrest , transport problems , investment cutbacks and unrelenting public suspicion over nuclear power is causing mounting problems for the Soviet energy industry .
3432	Officials now warn that fuel supplies could be seriously disrupted this winter .
3433	This is the last thing President Mikhail Gorbachev needs , as he tries to contain a staggering economic crisis .
3434	But every sign now is that to shortages , inflation and a runaway budget deficit must be added serious shortfalls in output of coal , oil and nuclear energy .
3435	The troubles of the nuclear industry in the aftermath of the Chernobyl disaster of 1986 are well known : a slowdown or halt to construction of new plants , plus the closedown earlier this year of the nuclear power station near Erevan in Armenia because of safety worries after last December 's earthquake .
3436	Now , in the space of four days , two key ministers have given bleak warnings over the state of affairs in both the oil and coal industries , the largest of their kind in the world .
3437	In oil , the main problem is administrative disruption following last June 's merger of the oil and gas industries and the switch to greater financial autonomy for individual production units , coupled with intended massive cutbacks in capital investment plans as the government seeks to balance its own books .
3438	‘ The situation is desperately serious , ’ the Deputy Oil Minister , Vladimir Filanovsky-Zenkov , told the Socialist Industry newspaper last week .
3439	‘ The vast bulk of enterprises are not ready for change .
3440	They do not want to operate independently because they are unable to do so . ’
3441	Oil output would be at least 12 million tonnes below the planned 1989 level of 624 million tonnes .
3442	Over the next five years there would be shortfalls of ‘ tens of millions of tonnes ’ unless new investments came on stream , he warned almost as the government announced that capital spending in the energy sector would be slashed by 40 per cent .
3443	The coal industry faces similar problems following last summer 's strikes in the Ukraine and central Siberia .
3444	Mikhail Shchadov , the Minister for Coal , told the Trud newspaper yesterday that so far this year , deliveries were 18.5 million tonnes less than planned , while 35 million tonnes of mined coal was lying at pitheads for want of freight rolling-stock .
3445	But the strikes themselves have left the most disturbing legacy .
3446	Of late ‘ productive and technological discipline ’ had worsened .
3447	In the Donetsk region of the Ukraine , production in September alone was a million tonnes down .
3448	PCBs explained
3449	From Dame MARY DONALDSON , GBE
3450	PCBs — polychlorinated biphenyls — are very inert organic substances , which were prized because they were flexible ( being liquids ) but had very high insulating properties for electricity .
3451	They were also used in hydraulic systems because they did not react with the materials used in the pipes and pistons .
3452	They do not occur naturally , but were produced commercially for 50 years , beginning in 1929 .
3453	They are extremely hard to dispose of .
3454	Incineration , which claims a 99.999 per cent destruction rate , is the only known way of eliminating them .
3455	But PCBs are a disappearing problem .
3456	In the late Seventies many countries , including the UK ( in 1978 ) , banned their manufacture .
3457	Remaining stocks ( in electrical equipment , mostly ) are being burned , but traces will remain for many years .
3458	PCBs are now ubiquitous at very low levels in the environment , in both town and country .
3459	They are found at about 0.05 parts per million in Northern Europe .
3460	The concentrations are very variable , but though there is evidence of their being at higher levels near cities and urban areas , there is no necessary connection with waste-disposal sites .
3461	At least one study has suggested that high PCB levels in mothers ' milk is linked with a higher-than-normal incidence of haemolytic disease , a blood disorder .
3462	PCBs can create dioxins — polychlorinated organic chemicals — if they are burned at low temperatures .
3463	Animal studies have shown dioxins to be carcinogenic and to cause birth defects in rats at very high doses .
3464	There was , therefore , great concern that PCBs should not be subject to inadequate heat treatment .
3465	There is no evidence that dioxins — any more than PCBs themselves — are carcinogenic in humans .
3466	But medical opinion seems to hold that both should be treated as though they were .
3467	In any case , the controlled combustion of PCBs must be a diminishing source of the national load of dioxin pollution .
3468	Government research says that the presence of dioxins in flue gases from plants such as that at Pontypool ‘ are in the low range of parts per trillion ’ ( one part per trillion is of the order of 30 seconds in a million years , or one ounce in 28 million tons ) , and that all the UK PCB-destroying plants together emit only a ‘ few grammes per year ’ .
3469	Ageing municipal domestic waste incinerators are a far greater source of dioxins ( and are slowly being upgraded ) ; domestic fires and unleaded petrol are the next biggest sources .
3470	PCBs : The incinerators
3471	From Dame MARY DONALDSON , GBE
3472	THE incineration of PCBs requires a furnace which will hold the material at 1,100C for at least two seconds , in the presence of plenty of oxygen .
3473	Companies wishing to enter the waste disposal business at this level must demonstrate to the local Waste Disposal Authority ( usually a county council , but in some cities and in Wales a more local authority ) that they can meet various criteria , although the authority may be over-ruled on appeal to the Secretary of State for the Environment .
3474	Her Majesty 's Inspectorate of Pollution is now the custodian of national standards on emissions from such plants , of which Britain currently has three .
3475	Rechem can take solid and liquid wastes contaminated with PCBs at its plant at Pontypool ( 30,000 tonnes a year ) , and liquid wastes ( 20,000 tonnes a year ) at its plant at Fawley , near Southampton .
3476	Cleanaway can take liquid PCBs at its Ellesmere Port establishment , where it is building another plant which will take capacity there to 48,000 tonnes annually .
3477	Ocean Environmental Management has applied for a 30,000-tonne plant at Seal Sands , Teesside , and is appealing against the local authority 's refusal to allow it .
3478	Leigh Environmental wants to build an incinerator plant near Doncaster , but also faces local authority opposition , and International Technology Corporation has submitted a joint application with Northumbrian Water for incinerators at Teesside and Tyneside for the incineration of sewage sludge and organic wastes , with a capacity of 43,000 tonnes each .
3479	The figures quoted are for a mix of wastes requiring incineration .
3480	Only a fraction is PCB-contaminated material : the bulk of the load must be wastes with a higher calorific value for the incinerator to work .
3481	About 80,000 tonnes of waste for incineration or treatment is imported every year , as against the five million tonnes which England and Wales produce .
3482	All these incinerators offer what is called ‘ merchant capacity ’ — they sell their facilities to dispose of other people 's waste , but do not produce the waste themselves .
3483	There are no in-house incinerators licensed to take PCBs , though many firms run incinerators which can take simpler chemical wastes .
3484	There are a few merchant facilities licensed to take dangerous organic wastes , which are nonetheless not the worst-case highly chlorinated wastes ( one of these is the Leigh plant at Killamarsh near Sheffield ) .
3485	PCBs : What Rechem says about Pontypool
3486	From Dame MARY DONALDSON , GBE
3487	HIGH-temperature incineration converts the carbon and hydrogen in organic chemicals into carbon dioxide and water .
3488	Many of these chemicals also contain chlorine , which is converted to common salt in the gas-cleaning plant .
3489	Stack emissions , which are continuously monitored , meet the strictest standards in the world .
3490	PCBs are used as a ‘ marker ’ to measure the incinerator efficiency , because they are very stable organic compounds .
3491	Measurements taken over many years show that levels of PCBs in grass and soil in the area impacted by the stack plume are indistinguishable from background levels .
3492	The stack emission comfortably meets the American standard for breathing air .
3493	The stack plume is normally barely visible but appears more prominent at night , when lower ambient temperatures lead to increased condensation of the water vapour .
3494	The water used by the gas-cleaning plant is cooled by a cooling tower which itself emits two water-vapour plumes , the density of which varies according to climatic conditions .
3495	The quality of these plumes is well within the American PCB standard for breathing air .
3496	The inert ash removed from the incinerator and the filter cake produced from the solids washed from the combustion gases are landfilled with a PCB content less than normal background soil levels .
3497	The water effluent from the cleaning process is discharged to sewer with a PCB content less than the level in the blood of the general population .
3498	Finally , the air leaving site is continuously monitored to show that there are no significant chemical releases .
3499	The PCB content is less than one-fiftieth of the American breathing air standard .
3500	Unfortunately , because of mankind 's carelessness with PCBs in the past , they are already ubiquitous .
3501	By destroying these wastes Rechem is significantly helping to prevent further pollution of the local and world environment .
3502	An atmosphere poisoned by mistrust
3503	By NICHOLAS ROE
3504	The disposal of toxic wastes is one of the most intractable problems facing industrialised societies .
3505	Even though some of the most dangerous and persistent toxins , including polychlorinated biphenyls , PCBs , are no longer manufactured , quantities of them still exist , and must be got rid of .
3506	But how ?
3507	And where ?
3508	On this page , Nick Roe visits a plant which , despite strenuous public relations efforts , has failed to convince its neighbours that it has come clean .
3509	And Richard North looks at current provisions for the destruction of PCBs , and at the history of British involvement in a rather uncomfortable growth industry The security guard at the entrance to one of Britain 's mightiest hazardous waste disposal plants pressed a button and the gate opened .
3510	Then he pressed another knob and a big toy doll in his office window dropped its trousers .
3511	You had to laugh .
3512	Yet this was Rechem International 's high-temperature incineration plant at Pontypool in Gwent , South Wales .
3513	Hardly a laughing matter , surely ?
3514	Beyond the barrier lay some of the most toxic chemicals known , awaiting destruction by fire .
3515	What else ?
3516	A vast , smoke-blackened furnace ; 100 people to do the work ; massive investment — the company spent £2m last year on cleaning up smoke emissions .
3517	Plus a backdrop of houses covering the valley walls on either side , a reminder that wherever industrialised societies decide to deal with their most intractable problems , they are unlikely to find a place to do so which is not in somebody 's back yard .
3518	Britain grinds out almost five million tonnes of hazardous waste each year , of which about 63,000 tonnes are so difficult to store or treat that they are burnt at high temperatures here in Gwent or at one of three other centres : Ellesmere Port ; Fawley , near Southampton ; and the unfortunately named Killamarsh , near Sheffield .
3519	Five more incinerators currently proposed in various parts of the country will double capacity .
3520	Then there are the imports : 83,000 tonnes of toxic waste enter British ports annually for incineration or other treatment , a figure which has increased 20-fold in just eight years .
3521	In these environmentally conscious times , this is an uncomfortable growth industry .
3522	Liverpool dockers recently turned back parts of a 1,500-tonne consignment of Canadian PCBs ( polychlorinated biphenyls ) bound for this plant in Gwent .
3523	In doing so , they underlined a fact which is likely to attract more and more attention as tankers continue to shift toxins from town to town , country to country : the waste chain is long .
3524	It snakes in and out of ports , along our busiest highways and through our most crowded cities .
3525	Anxieties which are currently felt most acutely by those living near destruction plants themselves may not always remain so localised .
3526	At Pontypool , the collision between a precise , scientific industry and a diffuse , unscientific local suspicion is painfully apparent .
3527	Local people mutter and march , make speeches and throw things ; staff face sarcasm in nearby pubs ; and for years there have been demands for a public inquiry .
3528	Rechem has responded with a rather desperate open-door policy aimed at soothing fears , and more recently by issuing about a dozen writs against the fiercest critics .
3529	‘ We are an aggressive company , ’ admitted David Wheeler , operations director at this plant and at Rechem 's other incinerator , at Fawley .
3530	For a place so hated , the Pontypool plant looks innocuous inside , like a cross between an oil refinery and a crematorium .
3531	Mr Wheeler , an engineer who worked for many years in the oil business , is a pleasant , slightly worried-looking man who can not bear the fact that no one seems to realise just what lengths he goes to in order to keep the plant squeaky clean and emission-free .
3532	In hard hats and protective glasses , we walked past the huge ‘ fume cupboard ’ where the most noxious barrels are opened , and arrived at the vast , closed mouth of the furnace itself .
3533	It was hot , but not burning .
3534	There was a fault on the computer governing the plant , said Mr Wheeler , and the fire had automatically shut down .
3535	These pipes stretching thinly in a bridge across the service road injected a mix of chemicals into the walls of the furnace itself ; did I know that fuel was only used in the start-up process , after which the chemicals themselves provided the fire ?
3536	Workers in blue overalls drifted around us and cracked jokes in gentle Welsh accents .
3537	In the furnace control office I found shift foreman Keith Thomas and asked innocently if he had any physical problems : ‘ Not since my vasectomy . ’
3538	A grin .
3539	He lived locally , so how did neighbours view his job here ?
3540	‘ You get sarcasm mainly .
3541	A lot of my friends are pleased that the company is doing the job they are doing .
3542	Others are not so well informed .
3543	You could n't hope to convert them . ’
3544	At a nearby house , Leonard Hough , a retired schoolmaster , had earlier told me about ‘ the fog ’ which he says comes from the factory .
3545	‘ It blows along the valley .
3546	They 've improved the chimney recently and it 's very much better than it was but we still get the smells .
3547	And since they 've refused repeatedly to have a public inquiry into what is going on there we 're not certain of the safety of what 's coming out .
3548	We get smoke from the steel works across the valley , but we know what that is and we 're not afraid of it . ’
3549	Keith Thomas pressed a button and a huge door clanked upwards so that I could peer into the heart of the furnace .
3550	Piles of ruddy-brown ash lay heaped on the floor .
3551	Pumps sucked air inwards .
3552	Heat shone out .
3553	In here , they burn about 30,000 tonnes of chemicals a year , a quarter originating outside Britain .
3554	The waste arrives at the rate of up to seven tanker-loads every day — that is seven lorries passing thousands of doorsteps .
3555	Right here , in this gaping mouth , lies the end of the chain .
3556	The wastes include lindane , DDT , out-of-date drugs , carcinogenic chemicals , old cigars and even pornography ( a different kind of pollution ) .
3557	About 7,000 tonnes of the total waste is PCB-contaminated .
3558	PCBs are so difficult to destroy , that Rechem 's emission-monitoring systems are geared to detecting them on the grounds that if you destroy PCBs you destroy everything .
3559	This , of course , is a key point .
3560	If you did not burn chemicals like PCBs , what else would you do with them ?
3561	The sea ?
3562	The earth ?
3563	‘ We are not in the business of polluting the environment , ’ Mr Wheeler insisted .
3564	‘ We are on the side of the angels . ’
3565	Environmental organisations , however , put the emphasis elsewhere .
3566	‘ There is no incinerator which completely destroys toxic wastes , ’ Madeleine Cobbing , Greenpeace 's toxics campaigner , told me .
3567	‘ The crux of our argument is that we do n't need to have toxic wastes and the fact that plants like Rechem exist , providing easy options for companies , is acting as a disincentive for companies to clean up . ’
3568	But — another but — what about the PCBs that already exist ?
3569	Although they are no longer manufactured , they are still present , for example in electrical equipment .
3570	No one could therefore call for the closure of incineration plants at a stroke , because noxious chemicals have to go somewhere .
3571	So a part of the argument switches to the kind of incinerators you allow while industry is forced to clean itself up .
3572	Also , how these should function and — perhaps most important of all — where you put them .
3573	Mr Wheeler , now moving to the rear of the plant to show off the £2m smoke-cleaning section , which had just broken down , pointed out that his company achieved destruction of at least 99.9999 per cent of all materials .
3574	The company 's figures imply that when you have burnt 99.9999 per cent of a 30,000-tonne annual throughput , a figure of 0.03 of a tonne remains .
3575	In 1986 , according to Friends of the Earth , a survey of the homes clustered on the surrounding hills found that three-quarters of 800 residents were opposed to the Rechem plant .
3576	‘ The plant should be relocated because it 's in the wrong place , ’ Llew Smith , the local Euro-MP , told me .
3577	‘ It is in a valley and in a highly populated area . ’
3578	What did Mr Wheeler make of that ?
3579	‘ If we do it properly any spot is the right spot , ’ he insisted .
3580	Stack emissions of PCBs were below the American standard for breathing air - 1,000 times lower than the British equivalent .
3581	Regular soil and grass tests showed no difference between PCB contamination in the immediate area and elsewhere in Wales — though there are no established ‘ safe ’ levels for these .
3582	Five air-monitoring plants had been installed ( he took me to see them ) .
3583	And here were drums of chemicals , each labelled , each with a job number to check against sampling .
3584	And yet there are accidents .
3585	In 1987 , aluminium melted in the furnace , reacted with water and exploded , sending a black cloud over nearby houses .
3586	Later , drums supposedly containing carcinogenic drugs were not opened for checking before burning ( for health reasons ) and three were ‘ misdescribed ’ .
3587	They , too , reacted with water , and a plant operator was burned by a cloud of acid gas .
3588	We walked past a tanker where a huge man named Andy Matthews was pumping vinyl acetate into a 10,000-gallon vat , wreathed in its sweet , sickly smell : ‘ I 've been here two years , ’ he said .
3589	‘ My father was an industrial chemist and he said if you want to go and work for them , go and work for them . ’
3590	Were there any spillages ?
3591	He shrugged .
3592	‘ Nothing major .
3593	I might drop a pipe — a little bit of a splash . ’
3594	In a large , prefabricated shed we wandered past stacks of 45-gallon drums of PCBs , two drums high , about 10 deep ; and there were contaminated transformers waiting to be cut up and roasted in the flames .
3595	Back along the waste chain , the Liverpool dockers who objected to the import of exactly this type of chemical should be aware that PCBs are moving about our roads all the time .
3596	There was no difference between the liquid in these drums and the liquid in the cargoes they refused to touch .
3597	In Liverpool , a dockers ' spokesman with the Transport and General Workers Union admitted : ‘ Drivers are n't happy handling some of these commodities , but at least a lorry-driver has more idea of what he is handling than a docker , who could have a consignment and just not know what it is . ’
3598	Yet he did not oppose all toxic waste movement ( after all , the same union represents workers at Rechem itself ) ; he simply did n't like the idea that big industrial nations like Canada could dump their dirty problems on this country and his members .
3599	Driving away , I noticed that the vast chimney was still not functioning , but when I called at a neighbouring house a woman showed me videos she had taken of smoke coming from the plant , settling in her garden .
3600	Certainly the incinerator seems well controlled .
3601	Certainly there is no scientific evidence that living nearby increases the risk of sickness .
3602	Certainly , Mr Wheeler convinced me that his company was going to huge lengths to keep itself clean .
3603	‘ We must run it safely in the short term and long term , ’ he said , ‘ because if people are able to demonstrate that we are causing an environment problem we will be shut down . ’
3604	In April 1985 a tanker spilled 200 litres of PCBs over the main Trans-Canada Highway on the border between Ontario and Manitoba .
3605	A section of the road was shut for a week and motorists were warned to clean their cars and to dispose of the rags in plastic bags .
3606	PCBs : The relative risk of grilling a kipper
3607	By RICHARD NORTH
3608	THE most curious thing about the transport and incineration of PCB wastes is that they are , amongst professionals , the least controversial of all the problems they deal with .
3609	Indeed , they see incineration as a solution to toxic waste whose usefulness should be employed on a greater range of materials .
3610	The House of Commons Environment Committee ( which could be presumed to care about being popular ) , the House of Lords Science and Technology Committee ( which has more expertise and rather less concern with popularity ) and the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution ( which has most expertise of all and absolutely no interest in popularity ) have all been robustly and consistently critical of most parts of the waste-disposal chain .
3611	They all endorse the technology of incineration used to destroy PCBs .
3612	The only variation is between those who say the provenance of the wastes is irrelevant , and those who argue that imports of PCBs and other hazardous material should be discourged , because only a tough import policy will ensure that other countries build their own plants .
3613	David Mills , the erstwhile head of the Hazardous Chemical wing of Her Majesty 's Inspectorate of Pollution ( HMIP ) — and well known for his criticisms of the lack of effective policing of what he defends as largely sound rules — says that placing high-temperature incinerators in some sort of hierarchy of risks is ‘ a terribly subjective business . ’
3614	But Mr Mills , who is now a director of Aspinwalls , an environment consultancy firm , goes on : ‘ Because of what I know , I would be perfectly content to live next to any of the plants we have .
3615	They are managed well , they have appropriate technology and conduct an environmentally safe process .
3616	If you compare the transport of PCBs with that of a 5,000-gallon tanker of petrol , or liquid petroleum gas — or any of the hazardous chemicals which are routinely trundling about our roads — PCBs are of a very low order of toxicity or risk .
3617	‘ PCBs were designed to be inert .
3618	They are not going to explode or burn .
3619	They are not a risk if you happen to come across them inadvertently .
3620	Compare them with a tanker full of chemicals which are corrosive , taint water at minute levels and kill living organisms at low doses : PCBs are n't like that .
3621	‘ What you have to do if there is an accident — and there has n't been one , thank heavens — is keep the spilled PCBs out of watercourses , because they would accumulate in the fat of organisms which came into contact with them .
3622	But that 's not an acute risk ; it 's a long-term risk .
3623	‘ Many other chemicals are far more highly reactive , probably more toxic , certainly more flammable .
3624	‘ Look : I ca n't say this strictly , as a scientist , but it is my feeling that a bonfire , grilling a kipper or lighting a cigarette all release greater concentrations of dioxins than you 'd be likely to find at the end of the pipe of a properly run high-temperature incinerator . ’
3625	David Mills says that there was increasing pressure in the early Seventies to see a higher percentage of waste materials incinerated .
3626	‘ There was general anticipation of regulations which would insist that more difficult wastes were burned instead of being sent to landfill . ’
3627	Soon there were 12 high-temperature merchant incinerators , of which four employed the highest technology .
3628	To the regret of professionals such as David Mills , the regulations never materialised and the market for merchant incinerators fell away .
3629	Most , except the PCB burners , have since closed .
3630	This chain of events suggests that Britain got into medium- and high-level waste technology early , but then abandoned the middle tier .
3631	It also means that we now landfill wastes that should be incinerated .
3632	But one can not have it both ways : for UK wastes ( the import of wastes for landfill is now outlawed ) the options are landfill or incineration , and people local to either hate the one near them .
3633	There is another option : export .
3634	The UK exports no wastes , but accepts them from countries which either have or should have the capacity to destroy their own ‘ chemical arisings ’ , as scientists call waste products .
3635	The Netherlands , for example , accounts for 43.26 per cent of wastes imported to the UK for incineration or treatment .
3636	There is PCB-burning capacity in Sweden , Finland , Germany and France , of which only the last is , like Britain , prepared to import such waste .
3637	Citizen protest is making the whole industry very cagey ; governments are reluctant to allow planning permission or import licences .
3638	On imports , Britain has been uniquely robust in the face of protest .
3639	Less determined countries export their waste and thus acquire an undeserved reputation for being green .
3640	It is a matter of judgement whether Canada , Australia and Japan should be able to dispose of their own PCBs .
3641	At present , none of them can .
3642	Margaret Thatcher will next month tell an international conference that the trade in wastes for incineration should be allowed where it is the best environmental option for existing wastes .
3643	In other words : keep a legal route open , sooner than see dumping .
3644	But , says a refinement of this view — and Mrs Thatcher and Chris Patten , her Secretary of State for the Environment believe this too — wastes should be disposed of in their country of origin : that is a new drift in British policy .
3645	It is a proposal which would still leave small countries , and especially poor countries , with a requirement to export wastes .
3646	It would also leave the neighbours of the incinerator plants exposed at least to UK wastes , and probably to some imports .
3647	These people have fears which the media has shamelesslessly played on over the years , but which are genuine .
3648	Rechem , which runs two of Britain 's three plants equipped to incinerate PCB- contaminated wastes , says that local politicians take various approaches .
3649	The firm claims a good relationship with its Fawley neighbours , and has always said it regrets the difficulties with Torfaen council ( the local authority for Pontypool ) .
3650	It hints that it is politicians , not disposal plants , which make the two places differ .
3651	There is a clear value in reducing the amount of chemical waste which has to be got rid of — and that thinking has a long way to go .
3652	What is not at all clear is whether one highly visible target — incineration — is anything like a major ingredient in the pollution cocktail , even at Pontypool .
3653	Health : Lively young woman seeks normal life : Elaine Heath , who is severely paralysed , tells Cherrill Hicks of the daily constraints she faces
3654	By CHERRILL HICKS
3655	ELAINE HEATH likes pink eye glitter and a vodka and orange before lunch .
3656	She reads Lenin , Lawrence and supports CND .
3657	Elaine is also severely disabled by cerebral palsy : she can use neither her arms nor legs , and she can only communicate by making noises , or by operating an electric typewriter with her nose .
3658	In spite of her disability , Elaine has in the past led a remarkably active and normal life .
3659	She has been through a marriage , a divorce , and a serious love affair ; learnt Russian , written regularly for a local paper and taught a young child disabled by a stroke to read again .
3660	But Elaine no longer has a close relationship to give her the support she needs .
3661	Without it , she has become a virtual prisoner in her own home ; she is ruled by the clock and the hours worked by her local authority helpers .
3662	Unable to go away for weekends or holidays , she never goes out at night to dinner parties , discos or evening classes .
3663	Her life has become intolerable , she says , ever since she became a social services ‘ project ’ .
3664	In the mornings Elaine can not get up before 9am — which is when her care assistant starts work .
3665	In the afternoons , she must always be home at 4.30 — so that the carer can take her to the lavatory before leaving for the day .
3666	( Even her bladder has to be regulated , she points out . )
3667	In the early evening , almost as soon as she finishes her meal , it is time to have her make-up taken off and her nightdress put on — before the nurse leaves .
3668	Elaine is excited that a reporter from The Independent is visiting .
3669	She laughs , shouts , refuses to give her age and is impatient to explain her problems .
3670	It takes time and effort for her to do this : constantly tapping her nose on the typewriter is exhausting , but then so is making her noises understood .
3671	We manage , with the help of Sylvia , her care assistant .
3672	Elaine gets a lot more help than many disabled people , and some would say she is lucky not to be in residential care .
3673	She lives in a large , sunny and specially adapted local authority bungalow in Northampton : the walls of the living room are decorated with her paintings ( done when she still had some use of her right hand ) and her kitchen cupboard is covered with postcards , love letters from old boyfriends and local newspaper articles .
3674	Sylvia comes from nine to five each weekday , and nurses are on duty between six and 10 every evening and for a few hours at the weekend .
3675	But Elaine says that despite this help , she might as well be in an institution .
3676	Her life is a monotonous routine .
3677	As long as she is ‘ fed and watered ’ , she writes , the local authority is satisfied : ‘ It has forgotten about the quality of my life . ’
3678	Unlike other single women , Elaine can not stay out late at night : she has to be home in time to be put to bed by a nurse .
3679	She can never go out and meet men ; and , after two close relationships , the prospect of staying single depresses her .
3680	‘ I desperately want to love and be loved , ’ she types with her nose .
3681	‘ I 'm terrified of growing old alone .
3682	Life is for sharing . ’
3683	Sylvia is one of the few people who has learnt to interpret Elaine 's noises .
3684	She has never cared for a disabled person before , but there is a natural love and empathy between them : she hugs Elaine a lot and they are very close .
3685	‘ My old mum , ’ Elaine calls her .
3686	‘ I would describe Elaine as beautiful with sexy legs , ’ jokes Sylvia .
3687	And , more seriously : ‘ I try to do things the way she wants .
3688	Staff who have worked in the homes become institutionalised ; they say this is the way we 've always done it .
3689	But if you employ someone in your house , you want them to do it your way , not theirs . ’
3690	The nurses who come in the evenings and at weekends are from an agency - which can mean , for Elaine , a new face every night of the week .
3691	Every new nurse needs detailed instructions about how to care for her — down to details such as pulling her bra on properly and making sure she is dry before getting her dressed .
3692	‘ Please treat me normally .
3693	I 'm not daft .
3694	My brain is perfectly unimpaired , ’ writes Elaine at the end of her list .
3695	The nurses are nice , well-intentioned young girls who do their best .
3696	But because they have to leave by 10pm , all they have time for are the basic tasks , such as cooking dinner , feeding Elaine , taking off her make-up and getting her ready for bed .
3697	Many of them are not used to disabled people , and , being temporary , they rarely get to know her anyway .
3698	‘ Elaine ca n't talk and that can be very disconcerting for the nurses , ’ says Sylvia .
3699	Elaine interrupts .
3700	She does not need nurses in uniform , she almost shouts : just because she is disabled , it does not mean she is medically ill .
3701	There is no conversation with the nurses , she says .
3702	‘ My day ends at five .
3703	The shutters come down . ’
3704	When they leave , Elaine has no professional support until Sylvia comes in the morning .
3705	But for the help of a friend who sleeps in the bungalow at night , and who can help her go to the toilet if she needs to , she says she would have to go into a home .
3706	Elaine went into a home last week when Sylvia was on holiday .
3707	She says she would rather die than do that again .
3708	She may not have any speech , but she has no problems in making her feelings clear : she wails at the memory .
3709	Sylvia translates her noises : ‘ It was hell on earth . ’
3710	The home had set times for the toilet : 9am , 3pm , and 9pm .
3711	‘ They had their own routine , ’ says Sylvia .
3712	Life has n't always been so dull for Elaine : she has managed , in the past , to survive the same upheavals as many able-bodied people .
3713	Sent away to boarding school when she was six ( she rarely sees her family now ) , she got three A- levels at college and shortly after got married : a mistake , she now realises , but she was pregnant at the time .
3714	She lost the baby and she and her husband divorced three years later .
3715	It was then that she met ‘ the love of my life ’ : he answered an ad she placed in the local paper for someone to read to her .
3716	‘ He was a middle-aged guy who thought he was coming to read to a sweet old lady , ’ she writes .
3717	They fell in love ; eventually he moved in .
3718	‘ My life was a dream . ’
3719	The relationship ended after five years : her lover grew too tired to cope with caring for her .
3720	He lives in the same town and it still hurts her to see him .
3721	For a while Elaine was cared for by young volunteers who used to come and stay with her for a few months at a time .
3722	But the volunteers moved on — to college or jobs — and she found the change unsettling .
3723	In 1986 she contacted her local authority for help ; it was then , she says , that her life changed for the worse .
3724	Northampton social services department says the problem is one of finding and hiring the right quality people .
3725	‘ Northampton is an expanding area and wages for care assistants can not match those to be found in industry , ’ says Bill Aitken , the department 's operations manager .
3726	He is clearly doing his best to make Elaine 's life more bearable , to create the schemes and find the care assistants with the commitment needed to befriend her , on the funds available .
3727	Elaine desperately wants to be free : free to fall in love , work hard and have fun .
3728	All she is asking for , she says , is to live the same kind of life as everyone else .
3729	This would only be possible if she had intensive 24-hour cover : if she could employ carers both night and day who could be flexible enough to adapt to her needs rather than vice versa .
3730	‘ Perhaps I am being selfish , ’ she writes .
3731	‘ But my life as it is now is n't worth living .
3732	It 's a living death .
3733	I 've already experienced a full life and now it 's been taken away . ’
3734	Elaine is an extraordinary woman : clever , lively and capable of leading a full life .
3735	But she is rapidly growing demoralised by her situation and is increasingly disinclined to do very much .
3736	She has even given up her beloved Russian , learnt painstakingly with the help of an old Cyrillic typewriter .
3737	‘ She laughs a lot .
3738	She seems like a very happy person , ’ says Sylvia .
3739	‘ But it 's false — it hides a lot of sadness . ’
3740	Health : Faith , courage , will — and a cancer therapy : The Gerson technique ended her marriage and took over her life , but Renee Henry believes it works .
3741	Liz Hunt reports
3742	By LIZ HUNT
3743	RENEE HENRY remembers quite clearly when she decided that she was going to live .
3744	It was a warm , sunny afternoon four years ago , and she was lying on her back in the park feeling too weak to move .
3745	She could hear her three- year-old son Rufus laughing as he played on the swings nearby .
3746	Her other son , Barnes , just six months old , was asleep in the pram beside her .
3747	‘ The thought of not being there for them as they grew up was too much to bear , ’ she said .
3748	‘ I had to get well . ’
3749	Renee Henry was a ‘ rare bird ’ , according to her surgeon .
3750	At the age of 33 she had breast cancer .
3751	But in the months following the diagnosis , Mrs Henry found that it was not only a life-threatening disease that she had to contend with .
3752	Her decision to refuse orthodox medical treatment and follow an ‘ alternative ’ regime — the Gerson therapy — provoked outrage and hostility from her husband , her family and her friends .
3753	‘ At a time when I needed all possible support , I was left alone , ’ said Mrs Henry .
3754	Like most people who are told they have cancer , Renee Henry was , at first , in shock .
3755	She did n't think to question the treatment her doctors advocated - as a research biochemist who had worked in the pharmaceutical industry for 10 years , the benefits of modern medicine had been instilled in her .
3756	She underwent a lumpectomy and then a course of radiotherapy , and was due to start drug treatment when she met another cancer patient .
3757	This woman was 37 years old , and she too had had a lumpectomy and radiotherapy four years earlier .
3758	She had taken drugs ever since , but the cancer had returned .
3759	‘ When I heard that I went straight into the toilet and threw up .
3760	She was just like me , she had been told that her prognosis was good and yet here she was four years later .
3761	I did n't want to live with cancer hanging over me .
3762	I walked out of the hospital and did n't go back . ’
3763	Mrs Henry found out all she could about alternative cancer treatments and dabbled in some of them .
3764	‘ At this time , I was living in a sort of Walter Mitty world .
3765	I had a husband who was pretending that I did not have cancer , and a mother who tried to inspire me by showing me pictures of Page Three girls under banner headlines of ‘ How I conquered cancer ’ .
3766	They were both trying to persuade me to continue with the radiotherapy and drugs . ’
3767	Mrs Henry embarked on a course in herbal medicine and it was during this that she heard about the Gerson therapy .
3768	She learnt that it had been developed in the 1920s by a German physician , Dr Max Gerson .
3769	He had suffered severe migraine which did not respond to conventional treatment .
3770	He had experimented with various foods and found that by restricting his diet to one of fresh fruits and vegetables he could control his migraine .
3771	Some of Dr Gerson 's patients — including those with TB — tried the diet .
3772	Their health improved and a cure was claimed in many cases .
3773	More patients with various illnesses were put on the diet , and good results were reported .
3774	Dr Gerson became convinced that the treatment helped the body to heal itself , regardless of the nature of the disease .
3775	This diet now forms the basis of the Gerson Cancer Therapy .
3776	It claims to eliminate toxins from the body , to restore a normal potassium and sodium balance in cells ( which is thought to be disturbed in cancer patients ) , to boost liver function ( also affected by the disease ) and to reactivate certain enzymes .
3777	The more Renee Henry learnt about the therapy , the more she became convinced that it was right for her .
3778	The therapy is a full-time occupation .
3779	It involves taking 13 juices every hour .
3780	They are freshly prepared from organic fruit and vegetables and consist of four carrot and apple juices , four green leaf juices , four juices extracted from calves ' liver and one orange juice .
3781	Oats , salads and baked potatoes form the basis of three daily meals .
3782	Caffeine enemas are given four hourly , as well as castor oil — orally or by enema — to aid detoxification .
3783	At this point , the strain on Renee Henry 's marriage became too much , and what had been a troubled relationship crumbled .
3784	‘ The day my husband left was the day I started Gerson in earnest .
3785	I went to a shop that sold organic food and bought everything . ’
3786	That was the start of the two most demanding years of her life .
3787	She had to commit herself totally to the therapy , while looking after two young children .
3788	Large quantities of organic food were not easy to come by in Surrey .
3789	‘ At night I would wrap the children in blankets , put them in the car , and drive down to New Covent Garden to collect the fruit and vegetables . ’
3790	She suffered chronic diarrhoea and vomiting as , she says , her body started to detoxify itself .
3791	‘ It was like having a severe bout of food poisoning that never got better , ’ she recalled .
3792	‘ I developed chronic asthma and eczema and cold sores .
3793	And all the time , I was working away until midnight preparing the juices . ’
3794	Three months into the therapy she began to suffer severe psychological traumas — she says she was in a state of constant terror .
3795	This is the point at which many patients give up the therapy , said Mrs Henry .
3796	But she underwent counselling , and also received support from Sheila McLean , a Gerson therapist and former nurse .
3797	Today , Renee Henry is convinced that she is cured and that the Gerson therapy is responsible .
3798	She acknowledges that such a claim can not be substantiated because she also received orthodox medical treatment .
3799	She refuses to undergo any medical checks because she ‘ has no need of further proof ’ .
3800	Mrs Henry 's encounter with cancer has , not surprisingly , changed her life .
3801	Next week is Europe Against Cancer Week , and she and Sheila Mclean are launching a charity called the Karnak Charitable Trust .
3802	It aims to make more information about Gerson available , fund research projects , and eventually it hopes to set up a centre for people who want to try it , in combination with psychological counselling , according to Renee Henry .
3803	‘ In fighting cancer , the most critical point is when you decide that you are going to survive .
3804	You need a focus for that desire to live , so you pick a therapy , orthodox or alternative , and you use it .
3805	But the most important thing is to believe that you will survive . ’
3806	Health Update : Crack connection with Aids
3807	By OLIVIA TIMBS
3808	THERE is much concern in the US about the addiction to ‘ crack ’ ( purified cocaine ) within inner-city communities .
3809	Doctors are worried that women turning to prostitution to finance the habit are at risk of contracting Aids .
3810	This problem has spread to the UK .
3811	In the past two months , doctors at the Regional Addiction Treatment Unit in Birmingham have come across five patients addicted to crack .
3812	Three are prostitutes introduced to the drug by pimps .
3813	According to them , crack is widely available in Birmingham and most prostitutes they know use it daily .
3814	The doctors point out in the British Medical Journal that , though crack dependency is not a direct risk factor for Aids , prostitutes ‘ trying to maintain expensive crack habits may be tempted into unsafe sex practices … which in turn may lead to an increase in the spread of Aids ’ .
3815	Health Update : Zinc deficiency in pregnancy
3816	By OLIVIA TIMBS
3817	FADS for vitamin supplements have been overtaken by a vogue for minerals and trace elements .
3818	Zinc is the latest : lack of it supposedly causes a range of problems , although little scientific evidence supports the link .
3819	But some reports have suggested that low zinc levels may lead to problems in pregnancy , from difficult labour to congenital malformations in children .
3820	There is stronger evidence that a zinc deficiency may cause the foetus to grow slowly in the womb .
3821	Doctors in Bristol decided to test the theory .
3822	In a study of nearly 500 women , they found that zinc supplements did not improve either foetal health or reduce the number of pre-term labours .
3823	The doctors conclude in the British Medical Journal that there would be little benefit if all women in the UK were given zinc supplements during pregnancy .
3824	They recognise , however , that the women in their study were largely middle-class , who might well have sufficiently large zinc stores because they were well nourished .
3825	Further studies , the researchers believe , should concentrate on pregnant women known to have a zinc deficiency or to be at risk from problems during labour .
3826	Health : Alternative cures ‘ not proven ’
3827	By OLIVIA TIMBS
3828	RENEE HENRY underwent a lumpectomy and radiotherapy for her breast cancer .
3829	Dr Maurice Slevin , a consultant physician at the department of medical oncology at St Bartholomew 's Hospital , London , said the chances of a woman being alive and well four years after such treatment were at least 75 per cent .
3830	Mrs Henry refused the drug treatment given to reduce the chances of a relapse , but there are many who would remain well without it , Dr Slevin said .
3831	Part of the attraction of alternative cancer treatments such as the Gerson therapy is that they allow a patient to feel more in control of the treatment .
3832	Dr Slevin agreed that this is often beneficial , but is concerned about other aspects of such therapies .
3833	Very few have been evaluated , and the evidence is largely anecdotal , he said .
3834	Some of the treatments have dramatic side-effects .
3835	‘ If they do work , that is wonderful — but we have no way of knowing for sure .
3836	There have been no controlled trials of the Gerson therapy .
3837	‘ If one of my patients wants to give up a potentially curative treatment in favour of an alternative therapy , then I will try to dissuade them .
3838	But it is essentially up to the patient . ’
3839	He said the NHS should address itself more to the needs of cancer patients so that they do not feel they have to go outside the system .
3840	They should be offered relaxation therapy and stress management , and advice on diet and exercise , he said .
3841	The Imperial Cancer Research Fund and the Cancer Research Campaign are conducting a joint study of the Bristol Cancer Help Centre , which offers a holistic programme — dietary advice and emotional counselling — to complement medical treatment .
3842	Talk of the Trade : Autumn price fall
3843	By PETER DUNN
3844	PETER FRASER , owner of the Classic Bookshop and opponent of the Net Book Agreement , has complained to Michael Joseph and the Booksellers ' Association about The Sunday Times 's special autumn offer of Edith Holden 's The Nature Notes of an Edwardian Lady , published tomorrow .
3845	He is aggrieved because , although it is being sold at the NBA price of £15.95 , purchasers are also receiving special prints with the book .
3846	Michael Joseph says there has been no breach : ‘ The Sunday Times 's promotion is theirs , not ours . ’
3847	Mr Fraser , with bookshops in Sherborne , Bristol and Bath , says he will probably sell the book for £13 .
3848	Talk of the Trade : Victims ' voice
3849	By PETER DUNN
3850	PEOPLE savaged by the tabloids are banding together to fight back .
3851	On last week 's Hard News on Channel 4 , Linda Joyce , the Princess Royal 's former maid , announced the formation of an organisation called Response , through which victims of the yellow press can compare experiences and seek redress .
3852	When letters were stolen from the Princess Royal in April , Miss Joyce was questioned by police and some newspapers jumped to the wrong conclusion that she was responsible .
3853	Joint founder of Response is Josephine Hunt , whose long-running battle with The Sun , which called her handicapped son ‘ the worst brat in Britain' , was also featured .
3854	Talk of the Trade : Chamber chat
3855	By PETER DUNN
3856	A SATELLITE channel transmitting the proceedings of the British Parliament and overseas legislatures has been suggested by the Astra satellite company , Marketing Week reports .
3857	Rupert Murdoch 's Sky Television , which transmits four channels on Astra , would participate but would not own the channel .
3858	Astra has already been talking to officials of the Commons about its planned service , based on the American C-Span cable network , which performs a similar function .
3859	Apart from Westminster , the channel could relay reports from the European Parliament , the US Congress — and one day even the Supreme Soviet in Moscow .
3860	Talk of the Trade : Floodtide for TV listings
3861	By PETER DUNN
3862	A FLOOD of new weekly television listings magazines will hit the market when what the Home Secretary calls the ‘ dotty ’ restriction on advance use of programme schedules is lifted in the next parliamentary session .
3863	Not all will survive .
3864	Rupert Murdoch 's TV Guide could be in the strongest position , to scoop a lion 's share of the market , since it is already established , listing all satellite channels and as much as it is allowed in the way of BBC and ITV previews .
3865	It will be able to draw on material and expertise from Murdoch 's American TV Guide , which has a stranglehold on the US market .
3866	Radio Times and TV Times will start to print all terrestrial and satellite television listings .
3867	Quite how the BBC will continue to ‘ advertise ’ the expanded Radio Times , exploiting its advantage of free airtime but implicitly promoting its rivals , remains to be seen .
3868	Media : Return of the six-gun saga : Modern actors can not ride and young viewers do not understand the cowboy code , but a revival of the western looms on the horizon , John Lichfield says
3869	By JOHN LICHFIELD
3870	Where are the TV westerns of yesteryear ?
3871	What happened to Ben Cartwright , Hoss and Little Joe ?
3872	Where is the Wagon Train that seemed permanently to be circling its wagons waiting for a drunken pioneer 's wife to have twins in the last of them ?
3873	The TV western seemed to fade into the sunset some time in the mid-1970s , victim of a narcissistic age that preferred to look at prosperous , smart-alecky or violent images of itself ( Dallas , Cheers , Miami Vice ) .
3874	It was a time when children were encouraged to fantasize about machines and outer space rather than marvel at the open spaces where the deer and buffalo roamed .
3875	Now , however , it seems , the wheel has turned full circle .
3876	The western is being revived , reinterpreted for the 1990s .
3877	One of the most successful Hollywood TV producers , David Jacobs , the creator of Dallas , believes the western also fell victim to late 1960s iconoclasm .
3878	‘ The John Wayne stereotype was rejected , along with his conservative values , ’ he said .
3879	A series of spoof or obsessively realistic 1960s westerns ( Cat Balou , Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid , Soldier Blue , The Wild Bunch ) stripped the mask from the Lone Ranger 's face .
3880	The legend could not be taken seriously any longer in what had been , admittedly , a threadbare form .
3881	Howard Rosenberg , TV critic of the Los Angeles Times , said : ‘ Just look at the re-runs of the old western series .
3882	You had heroes scotch-taped to their horses and lightly sprinkled with dust .
3883	You ca n't get away with that any more . ’
3884	John Mantley , producer of Gunsmoke for CBS for 11 years , says elements of the old story began to fall apart .
3885	‘ We all read Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee .
3886	We knew that the US Government had signed 453 treaties with the Indians and broken every one .
3887	A part of the myth just did n't work after that . ’
3888	At their peak in the mid-60s , there were 39 western series on the three American TV networks — almost two a day on each channel .
3889	In the US weekly audience ratings in 1965 , there were three westerns in the top five , and seven in the top 10 .
3890	By the mid-80s they had all gone the way of the buffalo : extinct save for preservation in the national park of permanent re-runs .
3891	Gene Autry , the first TV cowboy , now 82 , says westerns dominated the early days of TV partly because they had lively , cheaply produced visuals , but mainly because early TV was starved of feature films by the studios .
3892	Westerns were a handy substitute .
3893	There are encouraging signs , however , that the TV western is struggling back into the saddle .
3894	Paradise , launched on CBS last season and shown on BBC1 this summer , was the first new western serial for a decade .
3895	It was the only new drama series in US network TV to be allowed a second series this year , despite a relatively lowly 49th ranking in the ratings .
3896	Its creator and executive producer is , perhaps surprisingly , David Jacobs .
3897	Why did he follow J R Ewing , the epitome of 1980s TV , with a western about a gunfighter turned foster father ?
3898	‘ I believed the genre was still an important and powerful one .
3899	It 's something I 've always had an affection for .
3900	I found it was possible with Paradise to talk about individual and personal responsibility , something which if set in a contemporary context would have had a preachy feel about it . ’
3901	Lonesome Dove , a five-part story of a Texas-to-Montana cattle drive , also shown on CBS last year , was the best-watched TV mini-series of any kind in America for five years .
3902	It won substantial critical acclaim and will show in Britain next year .
3903	The 1989-90 season , which started this month , brought another new prime-time western series , ABC 's Young Riders , which tells the story of the Pony Express .
3904	It also says a lot about modern American TV .
3905	Because the networks believe westerns appeal mainly to middle-aged men , Young Riders has a cast of five pouting young male actors , in an attempt to make a western with ‘ good demographics ’ .
3906	The effect is rather like an extended advertisement for Marlboro Lights .
3907	Westerns are no longer a cheap option .
3908	The classic western TV series were filmed in back-lots , or in the semi-desert 20 miles from Los Angeles .
3909	Modern audiences no longer accept plastic bushes , and the southern Californian suburban sprawl means the production companies have to take their horses and cows to locations far away in Arizona or Montana .
3910	David Jacobs also points out that the cost of hiring a stage-coach is now prohibitive .
3911	‘ At one time there were dozens of companies which specialised in renting out western paraphernalia .
3912	Now there are maybe two .
3913	The cost has gone through the barn roof . ’
3914	And actors can no longer ride .
3915	They have to be sent to ‘ cowboy school ’ .
3916	Westerns , by their nature , demand more time on location .
3917	As a result , Mr Jacobs says , it cost nearly as much to make an episode of Paradise , with relatively unknown actors , as an episode of Dallas , with its big stars .
3918	Will the western ride again ?
3919	John Mantley is cautious .
3920	‘ Westerns have a gladiatorial , timeless quality .
3921	On the other hand you have a whole generation of TV watchers that does n't really know the rules .
3922	A western is like a Japanese Noh play .
3923	It is a stylised drama with understated dialogue that depends on recognition of key words and concepts .
3924	Many of the young people today have n't the first idea of what 's going on . ’
3925	In the inert 1950s the western represented a troubled , adventurous American past .
3926	In the anxious and eventful late 1980s and 1990s , they may come to represent , like All Creatures Great and Small in Britain , a less confusing past with simpler , deeper values .
3927	Maybe .
3928	On the other hand The Young Riders came 51st in the ratings in its first week , trailing far , far behind all the modern myths about modern times such as The Cosby Show , Roseanne , Golden Girls , Cheers and Matlock .
3929	It is premature , then , to say that the western has galloped back to centre screen .
3930	But there is a puff of dust on the horizon .
3931	Media : A discreet facelift for ‘ Le Monde ’ : Sarah Lambert greets the relaunch of France 's august paper of record , now aiming at younger readers
3932	By SARAH LAMBERT
3933	THE LAST 10 days or so have not so much shaken the world as utterly changed it .
3934	Le Monde , France 's daily newspaper of record , has been redesigned and relaunched with the help of a Fr25m advertising campaign which proclaims : ‘ Le Monde is changing . ’
3935	Le Monde is not just a newspaper but an institution .
3936	Founded after the war with de Gaulle 's blessing , its official brief was to recreate a national consensus and rekindle public faith in the Press which the collaborationist ‘ newspapers ’ of the war years had almost extinguished .
3937	That it is now required reading for the French Establishment and for anybody involved in business or education is a measure of how successfully it fulfilled its task without compromising a reputation for unbiased reporting .
3938	Because the country has a very strong regional press , Le Monde is not France 's bestselling paper but is unique in that 85,000 of the 385,000 copies bought daily are sold abroad .
3939	For many readers , Le Monde 's view of the world is France 's view of the world .
3940	That view is presented in a classical French , rarely illustrated , and then only with the smallest photographs or the occasional line drawing .
3941	It follows an editorial policy that believes foreign news should lead the first three pages , that matters of national interest should be philosophically debated in the newspaper 's columns , and that half a page of sport either side of the weekend is enough .
3942	Having survived a financial crisis in the early 1980s , thanks to support from the banks and from a staff prepared to agree to a voluntary wage freeze , the paper is now making money and putting on readers , so why has the management now decided to modernise the title ?
3943	On first sight it might seem a case of plus ca change , plus c'est la meme chose .
3944	The differences are minimal : cleaner print , a slightly smaller format somewhere between tabloid and broadsheet , the masthead underlined in blue and , the most striking development : the appearance of separate sections .
3945	But , as the editor Andre Fontaine explains : ‘ It is not so much a new layout as a new presentation .
3946	Newspaper readers are very conservative — the changes are not supposed to shock . ’
3947	As in Britain , French newspapers are having to respond to the growing demand for advertising space by adding extra pages .
3948	Le Monde , one of the country 's most profitable publishing concerns producing special supplements and books while printing other publications , has invested a sum conservatively estimated at not less than Fr350m in a state-of-the-art printing press .
3949	The press , at Ivry , a suburb south-east of Paris , is the most technologically advanced in Europe and will enable Le Monde to print in colour and to produce 64-page newspaper , a third as much again .
3950	With so many pages , the decision to divide the paper into separate sections : home and foreign news , society and culture , economics and business news with special supplements , books and ideas on Friday , arts and listings on Thursday and a radio/television guide at the weekend , has been dictated by the problems of readability as much as anything else .
3951	‘ The paper was just getting too unwieldly , we needed to give our readers some help in finding their way around the paper , ’ says Mr Fontaine .
3952	He also hopes the new format will attract new readers , both those who do not regularly read a daily newspaper and converts from the rival Liberation - which has won an extraordinary success among younger readers with its mix of lively writing , news features and bold use of photography and design .
3953	Mr Fontaine admits that the society and culture section of the new-look Le Monde has been inspired by Liberation 's treatment of similar subject-matter .
3954	‘ So many stories — drugs or immigration , for example — are international stories and should be written from a point of comparison , set in their international context .
3955	That takes time to research , and space to display . ’
3956	That so-called ‘ soft ’ subjects like health are now valid areas of inquiry and sport merits better and more detailed coverage has now been realised .
3957	The colour-printing facility , initially to be used only for advertising , may be used to produce a weekend ‘ leisure ’ colour supplement early next year .
3958	‘ I do n't believe in the fatal decline of the written word , ’ says Mr Fontaine , ‘ but we are competing all the time — not so much against television , because the screen image and the printed word complement each other , as against magazines , and against the time people spend getting to work and then their leisure time — against music and the cinema . ’
3959	Not all the Le Monde journalists support the change , which is the result of two years ' market research and several dummy editions .
3960	A professional designer , Jean Bayle , with a track record for breathing new life into tired titles , was hired but the changes he favoured were deemed rather too radical and , in the end — as is often the case on Le Monde where the staff hold a significant stake in the company — the consensus view prevailed .
3961	For the chief sub-editor , Daniel Vernet , it has not been an easy transition : ‘ We had to make sure that the paper read as a single publication , but that each section stood up on its own , while avoiding undue repetition , ’ he explains .
3962	All this disruption coincides with preparations to move to a new offices early next month , when all editing and layout will be done on computers .
3963	Meanwhile , there are plans to change the management structure so as to divide responsibility for editorial content , day-to-day management and the business side of the Le Monde publishing empire more logically .
3964	The task will undoubtably fall heaviest on Andre Fontaine , who with the death earlier this summer of the newspaper 's founder Hubert Beuve-Mery , has to shoulder the burden alone .
3965	‘ I look around , ’ he says , ‘ and there is no one there behind . ’
3966	The differences he and his production team have introduced may be ones of detail , but are no less revolutionary for that .
3967	Whatever the readers ' perception , Le Monde is changing and will go on doing so for some time to come .
3968	Media : Women 's monthly magazines : circulation figures
3969	By SARAH LAMBERT
3970	WOMEN 'S monthly magazines are battling it out in an extremely competitive market .
3971	Sales were hit by the drop in retail spending during the first half of 1989 .
3972	Prima remains the bestseller but is down 17 per cent .
3973	Essentials fell even more sharply , but is above target .
3974	Marie Claire is below projections .
3975	The explosion in advertising space has not been matched by demand .
3976	Battles wage over display in newsagents .
3977	Some magazines are responding to the new hard times by raising prices .
3978	Law : Why we must tame the state Leviathan : Greater use of judicial review would help people fight bad decisions by public bodies , Anthony Lester says
3979	By ANTHONY LESTER
3980	WHEN I began practice at the Bar 25 years ago , phrases such as ‘ judicial review of administrative action ’ , ‘ public law ’ , or ‘ fundamental human rights and freedoms ’ sounded strange to English judges and lawyers .
3981	They described apparently alien , un-English ideas , taken from Continental or United States systems .
3982	Successive generations of politicians , civil servants , judges and philosophers reared on a meagre intellectual diet of pragmatic utilitarianism and positivism had firmly rejected these ideas as a basis for ensuring constitutional government and citizens ' rights .
3983	For them , written constitutions , Bills of Rights , and a special system of administrative law regulating relations between government and the governed were exotic , inedible fruits of the American and French Revolutions .
3984	According to the conventional British wisdom of the middle of the century , our flexible unwritten constitution , our democratic Parliament , the sense of fair play of our permanent civil service , and our vigorous and vigilant free Press were safer and more effective guarantees of personal freedom than a Continental or American-style ‘ government of judges ’ .
3985	A quarter of a century later , the conventional wisdom of British mandarins looks complacent , self-serving , ill-informed , and outmoded — especially in the light of the many serious breaches by the United Kingdom of the European Convention on Human Rights .
3986	The powers of British central government are greater than those enjoyed by any other democratic country of comparable size .
3987	Between elections , a government with a sufficient parliamentary majority obedient to its will is absolute and omnipotent .
3988	Because it is not subject to the paramount law of a written constitution , it can make or unmake any law as it chooses .
3989	It can legislate arbitrarily to deprive groups of citizens of their basic rights or freedoms , to enlarge its own powers at the expense of local government , to weaken the ability of the media to inform the public , or to sap judicial independence .
3990	It can do all these things without the possibility of legal challenge in our courts .
3991	The common abuses of public power are not abuses by the sovereign parliament itself .
3992	The more usual examples arise from the misuse by public officials of the powers delegated by Parliament to central or local government , or to the many other bodies exercising administrative powers .
3993	Judicial review is the process by which the courts decide whether public bodies have acted within or beyond those powers .
3994	When judges perform this essential constitutional role , their task is not to usurp the administrator 's functions , nor to stultify good government by imposing legalistic requirements upon him .
3995	The court 's job is to ensure that the administrator has acted within the rule of law , and has not infringed civil rights and freedoms .
3996	But there are significant handicaps facing the individual who wishes to apply for judicial review of the lawfulness of a public body 's decision .
3997	In the first place , unlike normal litigation between private parties , the applicant has to obtain the court 's leave at the outset .
3998	This gives the courts a useful power to separate the wheat from the chaff among the pending cases .
3999	So long as there is a full right of appeal against a refusal of leave — a right which the present Government sought , at one stage , to abolish — this handicap is acceptable , even though it places public authorities in a more privileged position than the ordinary litigant .
4000	A less acceptable handicap is the special rule that the application for judicial review must normally be made within only three months from the decision complained of .
4001	It is in the public interest for challenges to the exercise of public powers to be made promptly , so that the administration and citizens alike know what the law is .
4002	But it is unjust that the individual 's right of access to the courts should be restricted solely on the ground that there has been delay in making the application .
4003	As the Law Commission recommended in 1976 , the test should be whether the granting of relief to an applicant who has delayed would cause substantial prejudice or hardship to any person or would be detrimental to good administration .
4004	What is wholly unacceptable is the denial of justice to the great majority of citizens who are not poor enough to qualify for legal aid but not rich enough to risk the costs of litigating an important public law issue in the High Court , the Court of Appeal , and perhaps the House of Lords .
4005	Successive governments have refused to implement the recommendation of the Evershed Committee in 1953 that the costs of going to law over issues of general public importance should be paid out of public funds .
4006	As a result , many who are genuinely aggrieved by apparently unlawful decisions by government bodies and public officials are effectively denied access to justice .
4007	The number of applications for judicial review has none the less increased significantly over the past decade .
4008	The process is now used in all kinds of contexts : immigration , prisoners ' rights , homelessness , the closure of hospitals or schools , access to local government information and , increasingly , commercial cases with a public law dimension .
4009	The decisions of Margaret Thatcher 's ministers are struck down by the courts as often as were those of the Wilson or Callaghan administrations .
4010	Ministers and senior civil servants are not amused .
4011	Recently , senior Whitehall officials considered whether it would be feasible to curb judicial review .
4012	After discreet soundings , they prudently abandoned the idea , which would have involved a major encroachment upon judicial independence .
4013	The danger is not that the courts will intervene too much , but too little .
4014	With a burgeoning caseload , too few judges , and increasing delays the courts may be tempted to block the further development of the law and to cut back on the advances already made .
4015	The recent High Court decision in the Rose Theatre case indicates a restrictive approach to what is a ‘ sufficient interest ’ to permit an application for judicial review .
4016	If that approach prevails in the higher courts , it will amount to a major reverse , making it more difficult for the ordinary citizen to complain of unlawful action by a public authority .
4017	In the Lonrho case , the Law Lords in effect decided that the Secretary of State had no duty to give reasons for his decision not to refer the takeover of Harrods by the Al-Fayeds to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission .
4018	The law requires public authorities to be rational in making decisions .
4019	In the absence of reasons , the citizen can not know whether a decision has been rationally , and hence lawfully made .
4020	Every independent committee of experts which has considered the subject has recognised the need to require public authorities to give reasons ( the current position in Australia , Israel and the United States , as well as under European Community law ) .
4021	It is regrettable that the House of Lords has not taken a similarly progressive approach .
4022	This is not to undervalue the change in judicial thinking which has come about in the last 30 years .
4023	From the First World War until the mid-Sixties , administrative — or ‘ public ’ — law scarcely existed beyond the pioneering textbooks of Stanley de Smith and Sir William Wade QC .
4024	For 50 years , English judges had been unwilling to nullify government decisions .
4025	In spite of the inexorable increase in the powers of the modern state , the judiciary had remained subservient : as executive-minded as the executive .
4026	It had been a dark age for administrative justice .
4027	Ministers and civil servants were naturally content to let the judges remain asleep .
4028	Fortunately , they woke up .
4029	Under the leadership of Lord Denning and Lord Reid , old common law principles of natural justice were given new content and value .
4030	The judgments in notorious cases which had decided that there could be unfettered administrative discretion were repudiated .
4031	Archaic restrictions on legal remedies were eliminated .
4032	Understandably , the courts are more willing to review a decision because of the way in which it has been reached than because of its actual merits , or lack of them .
4033	To hold that a procedure is unfair involves a less apparent interference with the administration than to hold that the actual decision was unreasonable .
4034	But our system is defective because it lacks coherent principles for reviewing the substance of decisions .
4035	A decision will not be held to be unlawful because it is ‘ unreasonable ’ in the ordinary , non-legal sense .
4036	Whether a decision is so unreasonable as to be unlawful depends , in Lord Diplock 's words , on whether it is ‘ so outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who has applied his mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at it ’ .
4037	A test which requires the judge to ask if the decision-maker has taken leave of his senses is too strict and is scarcely judicial .
4038	The European Court of Human Rights and the European Court of Justice ( and the Supreme Courts of Canada , India and the United States ) apply more sophisticated and properly judicial standards when reviewing the merits of a decision .
4039	They consider whether the aims of the decision-maker conflict with basic rights and freedoms , such as the right to equality , to liberty or to freedom of speech .
4040	They also consider whether the means used are reasonably proportionate to the aims pursued : in European parlance , ‘ the principle of proportionality ’ .
4041	It is this gap between ‘ reasonableness ’ , in the English legal sense , and ‘ proportionality ’ in the European sense , which leaves the United Kingdom particularly vulnerable before the European Court of Human Rights .
4042	Again and again , the European Court has noted the narrowness of the English test for reviewing the merits of official decisions , and has gone on to find a breach of the convention by the UK .
4043	Two appeals are pending against the High Court 's failure to adopt proportionality as the appropriate standard for review .
4044	In one case , Dr Colman , a registered medical practitioner was prevented by the Code of Conduct of the General Medical Council , from advertising the nature and availability of his practice in local newspapers .
4045	Dr Colman argues that a blanket ban on all advertising is disproportionate to the council 's legitimate aims .
4046	The court said that to import proportionality would ‘ create a monster that could quickly get out of control and cause widespread disruption of the many administrative processes that might attract its application ’ .
4047	In the second case , journalists are challenging the Government 's ban on the broadcasting of words spoken by Sinn Fein supporters .
4048	They argue that the ban is a disproportionate response to the mischief which the Home Secretary seeks to control , and is in breach of the right to free expression guaranteed by the European Human Rights Convention .
4049	Once again , the Divisional Court refused to apply the criteria used by the European Court of Human Rights .
4050	Whatever the outcome of those particular appeals ( in which I should declare my professional interest as representative of both Dr Colman and the journalists ) it seems inevitable that English courts , indirectly influenced by Europe , will eventually develop coherent constitutional and legal principles to review the substance of administrative decisions .
4051	The principle of proportionality — do not use a sledgehammer to crack a nut — is straightforward logic .
4052	And in the absence of a modern British Bill of Rights , the European Convention provides a convenient source of Lord Diplock 's ‘ accepted moral standards ’ where fundamental rights and freedoms are at stake .
4053	In this way we will move towards a fully developed system of public law which will better serve the interests of the state as well as of the citizen .
4054	Law : The other side of the crime : Pat Healy on 10 years of progress by Victim Support , a national charity which has helped 1.5 million people
4055	By PAT HEALY
4056	VICTIM SUPPORT has come a long way from the six-month experiment set up 10 years ago by a group of concerned professionals in Bristol .
4057	Now it is a national charity employing 20 people centrally and administering the work of 400 co-ordinators employed around the country .
4058	Since the national association was formed , 1.5 million people have been referred to Victim Support .
4059	Yesterday the Princess Royal addressed its tenth birthday meeting , attended by representatives of the Home Office , the police , and the probation service .
4060	The organisation took root because the originators of the experiment were shocked at how little the victims of crimes knew about getting assistance , says Helen Reeves , director of Victim Support .
4061	This included compensation , legal advice , financial and housing help , or even simply somebody to talk to .
4062	That is still the case , says Ms Reeves .
4063	‘ Ten years on , I am quite sure that the biggest issue we have uncovered is the issue of neglect , ’ Ms Reeves says .
4064	‘ Crime is bad enough .
4065	But when you have to face up to the fact that no one wants to know and people are more interested in the apprehension and sentencing of the offender , that for many people is even worse than the original crime . ’
4066	Not only are victims denied immediate help , they are subsequently kept in the dark by the police and courts about what is going on .
4067	Unless they are called as witnesses , victims are often not told when a case is coming to court .
4068	‘ There are tons of leaflets for offenders , but nothing for the witness or the ordinary member of the public , ’ says Ms Reeves .
4069	A former probation officer , she blames the way professionals are trained to see the criminal as the main concern , with justice for the victim — if thought about at all — regarded as an optional extra .
4070	So victims feel isolated and ignored and find it difficult to talk about their experiences .
4071	Their reactions can range from anger to irrational guilt , fear and embarrassment .
4072	Their families and friends seldom know how to respond .
4073	‘ People tend to ask how much they lost and whether or not they were insured .
4074	But it does n't seem to be an acceptable idea that something like burglary or a street crime can cause quite severe emotional disturbance . ’
4075	The worse the violence , the less people want to talk about it .
4076	Families where there has been a murder find that people are more reluctant to talk to them than if they had suffered an ordinary bereavement — sometimes even crossing the street to avoid them .
4077	Victim Support 's trained volunteers offer an immediate response when people are still in a state of shock , giving encouragement , support and information .
4078	The organisation 's original intention was to refer victims to another professional agency like social services , but that has proved impossible .
4079	Ms Reeves explains : ‘ With each of the really serious cases — rape , murder , racial harassment — there simply is n't anyone to refer people on to .
4080	So we 've had to do a lot of work ourselves , including researching carefully that we are doing something worthwhile . ’
4081	This research influences the way volunteers work with victims but it is also passed on by Victim Support to other organisations that might find it useful : it provides an input into every police training course in Britain , and that has led to a potential new area of work .
4082	Former police officers now doing security jobs in shops , banks and offices have begun to ask Victim Support to provide help for employees who have become victims of crime through robberies or other incidents at the workplace .
4083	Next year , Victim Support will be publishing reports on projects covering child victims of crime , families of murder victims , racial harassment and high crime areas .
4084	In January , it will launch a new court service , based on seven Crown courts in England , designed to establish the needs of victims and witnesses attending court .
4085	The organisation is also considering how it should respond to increasing requests for help with victims of domestic violence .
4086	‘ One of the biggest jobs we have got to do is to pass on what we have learned to the professions , ’ says Ms Reeves .
4087	‘ That certainly means lawyers , judges and magistrates , but also doctors and nurses , employers and school teachers .
4088	I do n't see the support of victims of crime as a separate service provided by a small specialist agency but as something which should be much more widely accepted like sickness or bereavement , so that people can get a more sensitive and understanding response from their employers , neighbours , doctors and so on . ’
4089	Law : Always take along a friend to sue : Litigation can pay off even in the unlikeliest circumstances .
4090	Stephen Gold explains
4091	By STEPHEN GOLD
4092	WHEN things go wrong you can sue more often than you may think .
4093	Money may not have changed hands .
4094	Someone may have even done you a favour .
4095	It does n't matter .
4096	As long as you can show that they owed you a legal duty to be careful and have been negligent , damages could come your way .
4097	There are a number of points to bear in mind .
4098	Take up references before giving credit , lending money , letting in tenants , taking on staff .
4099	Ask banks , building societies , former landlords , present and past employers .
4100	If you rely to your detriment on a misleading reference which was given negligently , you should be able to sue the referee .
4101	The subject of a bad reference can sue the referee for libel but has to show the referee was up to no good : spite , ill-will or some improper motive will do .
4102	Take along a prosperous adviser on all shopping sprees , demonstrate a high degree of trust and strong reliance in what they say and you may have unexpected protection should the seller go out of business and the goods fall to pieces .
4103	A 26-year-old woman accountant who knew nothing about the mechanical side of vehicles asked her more knowledgeable friend to find a car for her .
4104	She stipulated that it must never have been involved in an accident .
4105	The friend found one at a garage .
4106	Although he failed to check it had been accident-free , he assured the lady that this was the case .
4107	She bought it .
4108	It had been in an accident and it was worthless .
4109	In May last year the Court of Appeal upheld a judgment against the friend for more than £5,500 damages for negligence because he had owed the accountant a duty of care .
4110	Your conservatory collapses as a result of negligence of the professionals who were engaged by the previous owner to put it up .
4111	You can sue the professionals — builders , architects , surveyors or engineers — by courtesy of the Defective Premises Act 1972 , despite the fact that you never had a contract with them yourself .
4112	There are strict time limits : generally , six years from when damage first occurred ; where the damage was initially ‘ latent ’ you are given longer — three years from when you could have discovered it , with a longstop of 15 years .
4113	It may also be possible to claim damages against a local authority for negligently failing to ensure that construction work complied with the relevant building regulations .
4114	A solicitor fails to draw up a will within a reasonable time for a client who subsequently dies .
4115	You lose the gift which the will would have made .
4116	You can sue the solicitor for what you would have collected , had he done his job properly , because the law reckons he owed you , as well as his client , a duty of care .
4117	When you want to borrow on a mortgage , the prospective lenders will have the property valued at your expense .
4118	There is no contract between you and the valuer .
4119	But if the valuer is negligent and you buy the property relying on his report , you may still be able to sue him for damages .
4120	This is what the House of Lords decided in two cases last April in spite of an attempt to get the valuers off the hook by a disclaimer which said : ‘ I accept that the valuer does not warrant anything stated in his report as being accurate …
4121	‘ Alas , disclaimers may work if , for example , the property being valued is industrial or an expensive house .
4122	Disclaimers may also be used by referees and others to rob you of a claim for damages .
4123	Whoever attempts to hide behind a disclaimer must prove it is fair and reasonable to do so .
4124	But a disclaimer can never take away your rights under the Defective Premises Act 1972 for the collapsing conservatory or prevent anyone being sued for negligence which has caused death or injury .
4125	Have we yet reached the point at which we would be awarded damages against the Meteorological Office because we went camping on the day of an unforecast hurricane ?
4126	Or after we followed the duff advice of a legal journalist in a newspaper ?
4127	Mercifully , we doubt it !
4128	Bookshop Window
4129	By MISHA DONAT
4130	IF THIS WAS HAPPINESS by Barbara Leaming , Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson £14.95 Barbara Leaming wrote a biography of Orson Welles almost as fat as its subject .
4131	This is a suitably slimmer volume on one of his wives , Rita Hayworth .
4132	She was a professional dancer at 12 ; her father partnered her on stage and , according to this book , did far worse to her off it .
4133	Screen-tested four years later , she did something nasty to her hairline in the interests of personal sultriness , and was soon starring with Fred Astaire in You 'll Never Get Rich and You Were Never Lovelier .
4134	She proved both wrong , getting richer and lovelier by the hour .
4135	This led her into masterpieces like Gilda and The Lady from Shanghai , plus a fistful of failed marriages .
4136	Ms Leaming tells it all with vim , though the gossip turns her on far more than the movies : ‘ Aly practised an Eastern art of love known as Imsak , which allowed him to exercise indefinite control … ’
4137	With a bit more Imsak , this could have been a great book .
4138	POETS AT WORK , ed .
4139	George Plimpton , Penguin £6.99 So far we have had eight collections of interviews from The Paris Review .
4140	Now the editors have picked out some plums to make up a poets ' special - from Eliot and Auden , through Allen Ginsberg ( 'I think it was about the same time that I was having these Blake visions ' ) to John Ashbery and the delightful Elizabeth Bishop .
4141	Although some of the questions are dippy , the volume is an inimitable record of poetic opinions and conversational habits .
4142	Where else could you learn that Pound threw Robert Frost over his head in a restaurant ?
4143	BOOK REVIEW / A buried treasury of wicked wits : Claire Tomalin on surprising riches in a book which traces the ancestry of women 's poetry .
4144	‘ Eighteenth Century Women Poets ’ — Ed .
4145	Roger Lonsdale : Oxford , 20 pounds
4146	By CLAIRE TOMALIN
4147	IN 1730 or thereabouts Hetty , the naughty sister of John and Charles Wesley , wrote some verses on the subject of marriage .
4148	They ended with lines which leave the reader in no doubt as to her view of the condition : That wretch , if such a wretch there be Who hopes for happiness from thee , May search successfully as well For truth in whores and ease in hell .
4149	Hetty , the child of a clergyman and one of 19 siblings , had been taught , as a child , to cry softly for fear of being beaten ; ‘ by which means , ’ she wrote , ‘ the family usually lived in as much quietness as if there had not been a child among them . ’
4150	Hetty could read Greek by the age of eight ; not surprisingly perhaps , she was in full rebellion by her twenties .
4151	She refused to marry the first husband proposed by her father , and ran away more than once with lovers of her own choosing ; when she came home pregnant she was sold off with a dowry to a plumber called William Wright .
4152	The couple had little in common , and her children died in infancy , one after another , a loss she attributed to the lead works Wright ran on their premises .
4153	She was described as elegant , with great refinement of manners , and beautiful in her youth ; later she had ‘ the appearance of being brokenhearted ’ .
4154	Although her satire on wedlock was not published for more than a century after her death , its composition elicited an immediate rebuke from her brother Samuel , who admonished her thus : Repent , renounce all wicked wit : …
4155	So may the world your flights forget , And God forgive , and Willy pardon .
4156	Willy , thus bracketed with the Almighty , was of course her husband .
4157	We , however , may think that Hetty 's wicked wit was the best thing about her .
4158	This fascinating story is one of many such in Roger Lonsdale 's anthology of Eighteenth-Century Women Poets , not just a marvellous piece of scholarship but as richly entertaining and original a book as I have come across for some time .
4159	Out of the dust of the Bodleian , Dr Lonsdale has resurrected more than a hundred witty women and set them glistening and pulsing with life and spirits before us ; and through their fresh and often subversive eyes , the Augustan age seems much closer than it did .
4160	How many women poets of the eighteenth century can most of us name ?
4161	I was stuck after Anne , Countess of Winchilsea , Lady Mary Wortley Montagu , Joanna Baillie , Mrs Barbauld and Helen Maria Williams .
4162	Lonsdale 's ladies are by no means all aristocrats or the daughters of schoolmasters and clergymen ; they include washerwomen , milkwomen and servant girls ; the disreputable and the priggish , the contented spinster and the erring Duchess ; loving wives , bluestockings , governesses , actresses and invalids are all represented .
4163	Their biographies contain material for a dozen books .
4164	The number of women poets swelled through the century , not least because they learnt they could speak to one another in this way .
4165	The discontents and aspirations of each individual woman found an answering voice ; joined together , they became a chorus of inspiration for feminism .
4166	They were helped by provincial publishers who saw money in the subscription system and the growing market of women readers .
4167	Some were encouraged by Richardson , and by Dr Johnson , a fervent believer in the abilities of women .
4168	Many of the poems naturally have feminist themes — complaints about lack of formal education , domestic duties and brutish husbands : ‘ Wife and servant are the same / But only differ in the name ’ .
4169	One bold woman , Miss W- , takes on Swift .
4170	Her answer to the Dean 's famous poem on Celia 's dressing room ‘ is not recommended to readers of a nervous disposition ( ed ) ’ ; in parts it is more disgusting than the original .
4171	It is also devastating .
4172	‘ Of course the poetry 's no good , ’ grumbled a friend to whom I was praising this volume .
4173	He has not read it yet , but in any case he is wrong .
4174	There may be no single poem in it to equal Pope 's Eloisa to Abelard ( 1717 ) , Gray 's Elegy ( 1751 ) or Coleridge 's Frost at Midnight ( 1798 ) ; but one of Lonsdale 's intentions is to encourage us to extend our definition of what constitutes poetry .
4175	As in his earlier anthology , The New Oxford Book of Eighteenth Century Verse ( 1984 ) , he sets out ‘ to question some of the deeply ingrained preconceptions about what it was possible to feel , think , and write in the eighteenth century ’ .
4176	The most striking vein he mines is that of conversational and epistolatory poems ; they run through the century , offering character sketches , rural and city scenes , drawing-room and marital exchanges .
4177	One of the finest , by one of the finest poets , the Cumbrian Susanna Blamire , is ‘ Wey , Ned , Man ’ , recording a conversation she overheard about Tom Paine 's ‘ Reets o'Man ’ .
4178	Lonsdale also includes Blamire 's enchanting epistle , written to friends and describing a day which included doctoring the local children with her own medicines .
4179	She apologises for her simplicity , giving a busy woman 's reason : ‘ T is true I write in shortened measure , Because I scrawl but at my leisure ; For why ? — sublimity of style Takes up a most prodigious while …
4180	Blamire also wrote songs and lyrics of great beauty , including the well known ‘ And ye shall walk in silk attire ’ .
4181	The century also delivered a few gorgeous formal feminine odes : the Countess of Winchilsea 's address ‘ To Spleen ’ and Henrietta O'Neill 's ‘ Ode to the Poppy ’ , with its almost Keatsian languor .
4182	Lonsdale finds that , as the century progressed , increasing refinement of taste led to a loss of the informality , humour and immediacy that he prizes most ; and it was precisely the strained and highflown verse that was eclipsed by the success of Lyrical Ballads .
4183	‘ Ladies ’ verse' became a phrase of scorn ; anthologies ceased to include any , readers forgot its existence , and Elizabeth Barrett Browning was able to complain that she had no poetic grandmothers .
4184	Feminists will want to thank Lonsdale for restoring Mrs Browning 's poetic ancestors , but not feminists alone .
4185	Historians will find rich material , and so will the general reader prepared to browse and surrender to the many different idioms , rhythms and personalities revealed here .
4186	A review of this length can only touch on its range .
4187	The book has more than one useful index , notes and an informative introduction .
4188	For a taste of the verses see the paragraph ( left ) from Elizabeth Hands : a servant has published a poem on the biblical story of the rape of Tamar , and here imagines the conversation in the drawing room about it .
4189	Like so many of Lonsdale 's ladies she is surprising ; yet she speaks to us with a directness that wipes out the centuries .
4190	‘ Lonsdale 's ladies are by no means all aristocrats . ’
4191	The actress Sarah Siddons by John Downman , 1787 .
4192	From ‘ The National Portrait Gallery Collection ’ ( NPG , £14.95 ) a lavish selection of paintings with useful historical essays .
4193	Quotation from : On the Supposition of an Advertisement Appearing in a Morning Paper , Poems by a Serving Maid having been Published ( 1789 ) by Elizabeth Hands .
4194	‘ You 've read it , I find , ’ says Miss Harriot Anderson ; ‘ Pray , sir , is it anything like Sir Charles Grandison ? ’
4195	‘ How you talk , ’ says Miss Belle , ‘ how should such a girl write A novel , or anything else that 's polite ?
4196	You 'll know better in time , Miss . ’
4197	— She was but fifteen : Her mamma was confused — with a little chagrin , Says , ‘ Where 's your attention , child ?
4198	Did not you hear Miss Rhymer say that it was poems , my dear ? ’
4199	Says Sir Timothy Turtle , ‘ My daughters ne'er look In anything else but a cookery-book : The properest study for women designed . ’
4200	BOOK REVIEW / Thanks to the Universe : ‘ The Temple of my Familiar ’ — Alice Walker : The Women 's Press , 12.95 pounds
4201	By JILL NEVILLE
4202	‘ A ROMANCE of the last 500,000 years ’ is how Alice Walker describes her latest novel .
4203	It is tricked out with a handsome jacket and contains the standard acknowledgements , including the author 's thanks to the Universe for her participation in Existence .
4204	Fatal signs of weakness in American women 's fiction , these earnest references to ‘ cheerful support ’ , ‘ gracefulness and skill ’ , ‘ sensitive criticism ’ and ‘ inspiring example ’ are no doubt useful as emotional blackmail to inveigle the reader into the moist sisterhood of approval .
4205	Alas , this book need all the blackmail it can get , for it can not stand up by itself to disinterested scrutiny .
4206	Almost everything is wrong with it , in particular the tone , which is enormously soppy : hard to credit from the author of The Color Purple .
4207	Most modern black writing ( read largely by white readers ) constitutes a Literature of Blame , and it is certainly our turn to bow the neck and bear the blows .
4208	Once more we have the horrors of the slave-trade : the vicious overseer ; the destroyed African communities ; the black women endlessly raped , their backbones scraping along the ground , their smothered screams .
4209	But , with its lack of paradox , its sonorous and sentimental prose , The Temple of My Familiar reads like one enormous gospel-chant of reassurance for blacks , devoid somehow of truth .
4210	In fact it something called the ‘ Gospel According to Shug ’ , which is meant to be taken seriously : ‘ HELPED are those who love the lesbian , the gay and the straight , as they love the sun , the moon and the stars .
4211	None of their children , nor any of their ancestors , nor any parts of themselves , shall be hidden from them . ’
4212	Walker retells the history of the world from the black perspective with a series of symbolic vignettes .
4213	These ‘ fireside ’ monologues emerge from an assortment of inter-related characters and jump back through time to poor white Adam , ( Nature 's mistake ) .
4214	Old Miss Lissie not only remembers her previous lives , but changes physically when she does so .
4215	Hence photographs of herself taken by a lover look like lots of different women .
4216	Readers who believe in reincarnation will probably not find all this such tough going .
4217	( Sometimes the discussion of rebirth sounds like Shirley Maclean 's writings on ‘ channelling ’ , though one suspects it is not meant to . )
4218	But it would also be helpful to believe in some paradisal previous age of matriarchy and goddess-worship , to believe in astrology and to believe in the rightneousness of each feminist reflex .
4219	There is one scene in which the straight-guy Suwelo refuses to push a cart to the shops , he would rather go by car ; pushing a cart makes him feel un-manned .
4220	His wife Fanny is appalled by this unreconstructed maleness which is called a ‘ little murder ’ .
4221	Fanny is mystical and tends to go away on her own , so Suwelo has an affair with Carlotta , who wears three-inch heels .
4222	Carlotta is just comforting herself .
4223	Her husband , the all-wise singer Arveyda ( named after a bar of soap ) has run off with his mother-in-law ( a terrific story , this , and well-told ) .
4224	But they all end up happily together in orgasmic reconciliation .
4225	In contrast to the melodramatic historical memoirs there is a poignant moment when Suwelo faces the memory of his parents , who were killed in a car accident .
4226	Often the wonderful natural natural story-teller in Walker breaks through the marshmallow and has us on the edge of the chair , but finally and lamentably this is a failure .
4227	It would be insulting to someone of Walker 's stature to pretend otherwise .
4228	BOOK REVIEW / Tales of true suffering in Eritrea : ‘ Towards Asmara ’ — Thomas Keneally : Hodder &amp; Stoughton , 12.95 pounds
4229	By JEREMY BROOKS
4230	WE HAVE become used to seeing Thomas Keneally centre his novels on well-researched historical events , from the charge of Joan of Arc ( in the extraordinary Blood Red , Sister Rose of 1974 ) through the convict settlement of Australia , the American civil war and the negotiations that ended World War I to his Booker Prize-winner , Schindler 's Ark , set in Poland at the height of the holocaust , an unforgettable and moving book .
4231	In his new novel , Towards Asmara , Keneally is writing about the present ; or , more accurately , about a historical event that is not yet over .
4232	Eritrea 's struggle for its independence from Ethiopia has gone on , first against Haile Selassie and then against the Soviet-backed Mengistu regime , since 1952 , when the UN feebly handed over control of its Trust Territory to Addis Ababa .
4233	The suffering and the slaughter have been almost unbelievable .
4234	It is a largely forgotten war in which , as Soviet enthusiasm has waned , and Mengistu has been deposed , the Eritreans have increasingly gained the upper hand .
4235	As I write there are a few small , unexcited newspaper reports about the progress of peace talks taking place , under the aegis of ex-President Jimmy Carter , in Atlanta , Georgia .
4236	The Eritreans are described , as usual , as ‘ the rebels ’ .
4237	It is not possible to review this novel without such a background sketch , however flimsy .
4238	The narrator of the book , Darcy , a lawyer-turned-journalist in flight from a failed marriage , is inspired by a thinly-disguised Bob Geldof figure to question his ignorance about these matters .
4239	He makes contacts with Eritrean representatives in London , and then the professional lure of a scoop brings him , bumpily , to the front line in the mountains , with Asmara , the capital , only a 100 miles away .
4240	Keneally himself , researching the book , trod this same hazardous path in 1987 , and one may suppose that much of what Darcy describes , Keneally saw , that much of what Darcy feels , Keneally experienced .
4241	But it is into the mouth of one of Darcy 's travelling companions that the heart of Keneally 's emotional response to the Eritreans is put .
4242	This is an elderly Englishwoman who has ‘ inherited ’ from an aunt her engagement with ‘ the struggle against the mutilation of girl children ’ , or female circumcision .
4243	She is the widow of a life peer but is referred to throughout as ‘ Lady Julie ’ — the author indulging here in a little Pom-teasing .
4244	Lady Julie observes , as Darcy has been observing with increasing awe , the extraordinarily civilised behaviour of the Eritreans ; their exemplary treatment of prisoners ( 'We will insult you with our compassion' ) ; their well-organised aid programmes ; their balanced egalitarianism and their passion for educating their children even under the most appallingly adverse conditions .
4245	Finally she is forced into exclaiming , with almost bewildered amazement : ‘ These people are it !
4246	The link !
4247	A new level of moral being ! ’
4248	You may think this is way over the top , but by the time he gets there the reader , if he believes ( as I do ) in Keneally 's veracity , will have experienced the same emotion .
4249	Darcy focuses his own feelings on an Eritrean woman , a ‘ splendid bureaucrat ’ now based in Frankfurt but currently visiting the front line to renew her networks of information , and dreams hazily of a future sexual relationship with her until he discovers that she had once undergone , at the hands of the Dergue , such stomach-churning extremes of physical torture that ‘ my distance from such a height of anguish disqualified me . ’
4250	Of course it would .
4251	It is such universal perceptions as those of Darcy and Lady Julie that mark out Keneally as a major novelist .
4252	One might , as I usually do with one of his novels , quarrel mildly about his formal devices ; but that would be an irrelevant vanity .
4253	He makes the world stand up and speak to one .
4254	You ca n't niggle about detail after that .
4255	Recommended Books
4256	By JEREMY BROOKS
4257	A New Path to the Waterfall by Raymond Carver , Collins Harvill £11 .
4258	A moving collection of poems by the late American storyteller , with an important introduction by his widow .
4259	Reviewed by Hugo Barnacle , 23 September .
4260	London Fields by Martin Amis , Cape £11.95 .
4261	A typically startling , ambitious novel of murder and other threats .
4262	Reviewed by Wendy Steiner , 23 September .
4263	The Trick of It by Michael Frayn , Viking £11.95 .
4264	A novel about novel-writing , which handles its tricky subject with a light touch .
4265	Reviewed by Mark Lawson , 23 September .
4266	Europe , Europe by Hans Magnus Enzensberger , Hutchinson £14.95 .
4267	A lively tour of continental culture , seeking for signs of unity and predicting a grim future .
4268	Reviewed by Anthony Burgess , 30 September .
4269	BOOK REVIEW / Sisson : poet and commuter analyst : C J Fox welcomes the scorn and vigour shown by the memoirs of C H Sisson : ‘ On the Look-Out ’ — C H Sisson : Carcanet , 14.95 pounds
4270	By C J FOX
4271	C H SISSON — poet , translator , novelist , critic , polemicist , former Whitehall mandarin and the candidate who should have won Oxford 's Chair of Poetry — has finally unveiled his life 's story , most of it told , with typical unconventionality , backwards .
4272	It begins in 1964 and works back to the author 's birth .
4273	‘ If anything can be concluded from this book , it is that I was born , ’ writes Sisson after touching on that event , which occurred 75 years ago in a building since occupied by the Bristol Rovers Supporters Club .
4274	The author notwithstanding , many conclusions can be drawn from this steel-trap of a book ; about Berlin in Thirties turmoil , for example , as observed by a keen-eyed young loner from Bristol .
4275	Certainly it can be concluded that the circumstances of Sisson 's early life fuelled his salutary hatreds and helped form the outsider 's perspective which now makes him a scourge of the age 's insidious orthodoxies .
4276	So it 's with added comprehension that a reader of On the Look-Out can approach the taut ferocity of Sisson 's early poems and the sombreness of those more recent , the jarring plainness of his Divine Comedy and other such translations , the savagery of his two gaunt novels , and the war against fashion-induced mediocrity waged by Sisson the literary critic .
4277	More comprehensible too are his Seventies revolt ( fatal to his Whitehall career ) against the trendy refurbishment of the Civil Service and his scorn for Official Culture and for further dilution of the Anglicanism he cherishes .
4278	Sisson 's background , as now revealed , was the stark world of an artisan family stuck in down-at-heel Bristol .
4279	‘ The whole country was hostile … its shabbiness I took for granted , ’ Sisson recalls about his school-age surroundings .
4280	‘ I must have gone to and fro in great concentration of spirit , always anxious to get on . ’
4281	The ‘ concentration of the spirit ’ enabled this solitary youth to achieve a prodigious amount of literary self-education .
4282	He thus arrived at his city 's University in the Depression , well primed for encounters there with the suspect notions of Eliot , Pound and T E Hulme .
4283	But Bristol was n't Oxbridge , which compounded his sense of alienation from the left-wingery of those high-flying Young Gentlemen , Auden , Spender &amp; Co .
4284	Still , Sisson managed a ‘ Herr Issyvoo ’ sting of his own in the Nazified Berlin of 1934 and watched ideological street-squads slanging one another in Paris the next year .
4285	The German sights in particular — torchlit orgies of Nazi triumph , Hitler ranting in Stuttgart , storm-troopers stamping out the last flickers of academic freedom in Freiburg — showed him what lay in store for Europe and are vividly recounted here .
4286	Though he took his professional plunge into the Ministry of Labour soon afterwards , Sisson also began writing , taking the outsider 's route by contributing to obscure journals of the heterodoxy .
4287	His subsequent Wartime lot was equally offbeat though hardly agreeable , contending against boredom and filth along the northern marches of India .
4288	Re-immersion in the Ministry followed this prolonged servility , but a breakthrough came with the Fifties publication of An Asiatic Romance , a satirical fantasy explosively pointing up bureaucracy 's absurdity and irrelevance in a world reduced to violence and cannibalism .
4289	By 1960 , Sisson was a top Civil Servant ( 'civil to everyone , and servant to the devil' ) and had published a treatise called The Spirit of British Administration , memorable for its irony as well as its broad view of the subject .
4290	( Of Pontius Pilate : ‘ The steps he took to still a particular local clamour were more or less what the service required , and he washed his hands with a civilised regret . ’ )
4291	The collections of his poetry began to appear , notably a searing logbook of life as a commuting careerist , The London Zoo .
4292	The floodgates were now open and it is from here that the reverse sequence of On the Look-Out commences .
4293	This ‘ partial autobiography ’ bristles satirically .
4294	Manchester , for instance , is deemed ‘ one of those disgraces by which the human race advertises the squalor and turpitude of its mind . ’
4295	Of parish-pump politics in his old suburban nesting place , Sevenoaks : ‘ While everyone would pretend that a solution was what was wanted when there was a problem , in fact what most people wanted was trouble …
4296	The fatal addiction of the human race to trouble is something which , even at 50 , has not ceased to amaze me . ’
4297	The technique of reverse narrative is nothing new for Sisson .
4298	His novel , Christopher Homm , took its forlorn hero from septuagenarian death back to his doom-shrouded entry into life .
4299	On the Look-Out derives extra momentum from this eccentric procedure .
4300	But Sisson , in addition to bringing his story up to date with a final chapter , interjects halfway through a lengthy segment on his war .
4301	With its subject-matter mainly the crushing ennui of that experience , this section hampers the flow of the overall narrative somewhat , despite the crispness of its recollections .
4302	Much more telling as a crystallization of the Wartime ordeal is ‘ In the Raj ’ , included in that lynchpin volume of Carcanet 's big Sisson list , the 1984 Collected Poems .
4303	But as if to prove his powers of condensation in the autobiography , Sisson exercises remarkable reticence on matters of personal and family sentiment .
4304	Yet throughout he brandishes a fearless and confident individuality of judgement .
4305	There is exhilaration to be had from his fresh vistas , vigorous assertions as they are of a truly independent mind .
4306	BOOK REVIEW / The cause without a rebel : ‘ The Pale Companion ’ — Andrew Motion : Viking , 11.95 pounds
4307	By MARTIN PACEY
4308	IT WAS unfair of Auden to suggest , in his ‘ Letter to Lord Byron ’ , that a poet 's ‘ sense of other people 's very hazy ’ .
4309	But the vaporous presences that float through this slender and anaemic first novel by a notable poet would appear to support the claim .
4310	The book — which opens a projected sequence of novels that will cover the period from 1968 to the present day — aims to explore what the blurb describes as ‘ the painful transition from youth to adulthood ’ .
4311	This , of course , is a popular subject : it seems particularly attractive to the poet-turned-novelist because of the scope it offers for the tremulously sensitive probing of feelings .
4312	Sensitivity , though , is not enough .
4313	What Andrew Motion presents us with here is a static and humourless mood-piece filled with over-elaborate imagery .
4314	The hero , Francis Mayne , is suffering from the adolescent 's emotional confusion and acute self-consciousness .
4315	He finds it hard to communicate with people , not least his separated parents .
4316	His father is a faceless figure : a retired brigadier , reserved and taciturn .
4317	His mother , by contrast , is the most vividly realised character in the book : nervy , flirtatious and selfish , already on her third husband , she thinks primarily of her appearance , even when visiting her dying daughter , Francis 's twin .
4318	The first half of the novel is dominated by the girl 's death from leukaemia .
4319	There is a refreshing simplicity and tenderness in Motion 's account of the way Francis nurses her , but she herself is too sketchily drawn for the episode to carry much weight .
4320	Meanwhile , at his public school , Francis is conducting a love-affair with an older pupil named Keith Ogilvie .
4321	He is finally rejected by the devious , arrogant Keith , who informs him that he is ‘ obsolete ’ because he does not ‘ know how to make things happen ’ .
4322	His response to this rejection is as flat as his reaction to the massive demonstration which Keith has earlier persuaded him to join against the Vietnam War .
4323	This violent event , described at length in hysterically colourful terms , is the only piece of history to be woven convincingly into the plot .
4324	Other broad hints as to the date are inserted with a comical lack of subtlety : ‘ My God , darling , have you heard ? ’ exclaims Francis 's mother one day as she greets him , ‘ Czechoslovakia .
4325	It 's been invaded . ’
4326	Motion will have to do better than this if he seriously intends his series of novels to capture the feel of a period .
4327	But the book 's principal defect remains the vacuity of its protagonist .
4328	In his eagerness to depict the cloudy psychology of an adolescent , Motion has forgotten to give the boy a personality .
4329	He has , however , given him a psychotic compulsion to formulate fanciful similes .
4330	Hardly a page goes by without the hapless Francis noticing something which reminds him , improbably , of something else .
4331	Sometimes he is reminded of several things .
4332	One moment an avenue of chestnut trees looks ‘ like a child 's drawing of ghosts ’ ; the next it appears ‘ frightening but derelict , like extinguished chandeliers ’ ; and finally the chestnuts ‘ prance at him , holding up their gleaming branches like hysterics . ’
4333	Such writing rapidly palls , and I hope that in the novels to come , Motion can curb his reckless passion for it .
4334	BOOK REVIEW / The tooth and the socket : ‘ The Bellarosa Connection ’ — Saul Bellow : Penguin , 3.50 pounds
4335	By ANTHONY QUINN
4336	A TITLE like The Bellarosa Connection tends to imply two things : first , that the book will be a jacket-straining 600 pages ; and second , that its author will be Robert Ludlum .
4337	Neither is the case .
4338	Saul Bellow 's new novella , his second in six months , is a mean 100 pages .
4339	Coming from a writer whose reputation is built on large , expansive , improvisatory novels , these two miniatures seem a bit of an anomaly , or maybe just a diversion .
4340	A Theft was exhilarating , but it faded very quickly ; this new one , too , suffers a slight anticlimactic wobble at its turning point .
4341	The story is recounted by the unnamed founder of the Mnemosyne Institute in Philadelphia , an elderly widower who has recently retired after making his millions as instructor to ‘ executives , politicians and members of the defense establishment ’ .
4342	His theme is memory , a faculty with which he has been prodigiously blessed , though his origins as ‘ the child of Russian Jews from New Jersey ’ are held rather as a noble refusal to forget .
4343	This same impulse leads him to recall the life of Harry Fonstein , a distant friend who miraculously escaped the Nazi holocaust , thanks to an underground operation masterminded by the Broadway impresario Billy Rose , or ‘ Bella Rosa ’ as his name sounds when whispered in excitable Italian .
4344	Having arrived in New York via Cuba , the immigrant Fonstein seeks out Rose in order to express an entirely natural gratitude , but is shunned at every turn .
4345	His letters are sent back , and when he tries to approach Rose in a restaurant he is ignored , then ejected .
4346	The narrator identifies a larger issue behind this slight : it is the conflict between two kinds of Jewishness , between the embattled , coarse-grained immigrant from Europe and the wordly , go-ahead American , who rates business acumen and individual assertion over the value of community ties .
4347	Billy is a thoroughly American creation , a Broadway mogul , dandy and gossip columnist with a ‘ bug-like tropism for publicity ’ .
4348	His bloated self-aggrandisement is punctured , however , by the formidable intervention of Harry 's ‘ tiger wife ’ .
4349	Sorella , an enormous woman who brings out Bellow 's near-parental tenderness for physical peculiarity .
4350	Her obesity also represents a spiritual condition extended into bodily metaphor : hers is an immensity of soul .
4351	Confronting Billy with his unworthy behaviour towards her husband , she exposes this ‘ legend ’ as a cheap fake .
4352	When Sorella recounts this face-off , it 's also intended as a moment of recognition , an anagnorisis , for the narrator .
4353	Yet her candour and self-knowledge — ‘ I am built like a Mack truck .
4354	My flesh is boundless ’ - hardly qualify as a testament to a ‘ major force of personality ’ .
4355	Does Bellow think we should be amazed ?
4356	These insights look rather small when set next to his previous books of revelations .
4357	If there has been a diminution in the voltage , however , there are compensating pleasures of wit .
4358	Even the minor characterisations in this book bristle with prickly detail ; the narrator 's unloved Aunt Mildred ‘ had a powdered look , like her own strudel ’ ; Wolfe , one of Billy 's ghost-writers , ‘ builds up his reputation as a weirdo nihilist .
4359	He wants to become the Thomas Mann of science fiction ’ .
4360	This dry contempt strolls out even when its target is invisible : the narrator telephones the Fonsteins ' house years after they have lost contact and is answered by a young man , on whom he forms an immediate image — ‘ a thick head of hair , a beer paunch , a T-shirt with a logo or slogan .
4361	Act Up was a popular one . ’
4362	The conversation which follows is the last in the book , and the weakest , too , a stagey means of imparting some crucial news for Bellow to fulminate against all that is rotten and cynical in American youth .
4363	It 's passionately felt , for sure , but perhaps not adequately dramatised .
4364	When that news hits him , the narrator seems to crumble , even though a premonitory dream the night before has readied him for the shock .
4365	Shadows have lengthened stealthily in the course of The Bellarosa Connection , gathering for what Martin Amis described in later Bellow as ‘ last things , leave-taking , and final lucidities ’ , and at the close there is a quietly affecting image of the narrator setting down his story , alone .
4366	‘ At times I feel like a socket that remembers its tooth ’ , he writes , trying to retain some sense of the world even as he prepares to leave it .
4367	BOOK REVIEW / Alpine village idioms : ‘ Once in Europa ’ — John Berger : Granta Books , 10.95 pounds
4368	By HUGO BARNACLE
4369	THIS STRONG collection of stories is the second in a trilogy about the peasants of the French Alps , where John Berger lives .
4370	He produces the stories at a craftsmanlike rate , no more than one a year , so it is some time since the appearance of the first volume , Pig Earth .
4371	The cover photograph shows Berger gone native , in dark suit , stiff collar and homburg hat , for all the world like a French shepherd ( a berger , in fact ) on his way to a wedding .
4372	‘ In our village , as in many villages in the world at that time , there was a souvenir shop , ’ one story goes .
4373	‘ You could buy there skiers in glass bottles … clockwork marmots , goat horns … sunglasses , imitation butter-churns , my books . ’
4374	It is part of Berger 's purpose that he be seen as a village artisan .
4375	Pig Earth dealt with the traditional pattern of Savoyard life .
4376	This book is set against the breakdown of the pattern in recent times , the next will concentrate on peasants who have moved to the city .
4377	But the stories have a universal appeal simply as stories , and it is good that the underlying programme seldom obtrudes as badly as in the gift-shop passage above , where the helpful aside about tourism affecting rural culture worldwide strikes a primary-school note .
4378	The gift-shop used to be a farmhouse , one of several owned by the skinflint farmer Boris who made his fortune by never paying bills .
4379	The house now belongs to a buxom blonde from Lyon , wife of a driving instructor .
4380	When Boris began sleeping with her , villagers who wondered what would happen if the husband found out were told by wiser villagers : ‘ If you 'd lived in a big town you 'd know that the husband knows . ’
4381	Boris showered the woman with presents , eventually including the house which was what she ( and her husband ) really wanted .
4382	Realising that she had not loved him , Boris then starved himself to death .
4383	Berger sets this story up by saying : ‘ Sometimes to refute a single sentence it is necessary to tell a life story ’ : one villager mistakenly claims that ‘ Boris died like one of his own sheep , neglected and starving ’ , whereas the admittedly ill-tended flock was in fact killed by lightning .
4384	Here Berger 's roundabout , local-storyteller manner seems laboured .
4385	It works better in another piece , beginning : ‘ If every event which occurred could be given a name , there would be no need for stories . ’
4386	A young girl discovers that the old shepherd across the valley , her only friend , is passionately in love with her .
4387	Disturbed , she at once falls for a kind , handsome Italian woodcutter , becomes pregnant and elopes .
4388	Years later , in Bergamo , she still teaches the old shepherd 's phrases to her talking blue-rock thrush .
4389	As Berger asks , what was the old man 's relation to the girl 's baby ?
4390	Not quite the godfather .
4391	There is indeed a certain nameless truth to this one .
4392	It is a pity that Berger inserts passages told by the girl , which do not fit .
4393	In contrast the title story is narrated entirely by the heroine , and from mid-air too .
4394	Her son has taken her up in his hang-glider ( can you carry two on a hang-glider ? ) , and she recalls her life and loves as she sails over the old family farm and the nearby manganese factory where it all happened .
4395	Berger impersonates her to a fault , both in the superb egotism of female love — ‘ It is painful for us to judge the man we 've taken , for he 's already ours , like a son ’ — and in the certitudes of peasant thinking : ‘ I will tell you which men deserve our respect …
4396	The rest are pigshit . ’
4397	The best stories , though , are perhaps the first , about a middle-aged bachelor farming alone after his mother dies , and the last , about a member of the village brass band picking up a woman on a bus trip to Venice .
4398	These are the most simply told , and they have a nicely judged lack of any obvious point .
4399	Berger 's writing is wonderfully clear : once the book is opened it just reads itself out .
4400	Toil , weather , human character and the quirks of animals are all graphically rendered , as well as the way in which newly-lifted potatoes glow ‘ like children 's shoulders after a day in the sun ’ , or in which the voice of a once-active young man now crippled by an accident becomes ‘ far-away , like a priest 's voice at the altar ’ .
4401	Whether as social document or as fiction the completed trilogy could be , if fashion permits , a minor classic .
4402	Motoring : A lead-free lover 's guide to used cars : Drivers with a tight budget and an environmental conscience can buy second-hand without losing principles , says James Ruppert
4403	By JAMES RUPPERT
4404	FROM this month , all new cars submitted for British type approval , the test which allows them to be legally sold in the UK , must be able to run on lead-free petrol .
4405	As a result of this rule , and many carefully orchestrated publicity campaigns , the motor industry 's image has now changed from polluter to pal of the earth .
4406	If you can afford an environmentally friendly G-registered runabout , then the flora , fauna and children of the British Isles will have a lot to thank you for .
4407	But if you have a tight budget and a conscience , running older cars on lead-free fuel becomes a much more complicated issue .
4408	Without the presence of a lead compound , an engine 's valve seats go unprotected .
4409	This leads to premature wear and plumes of blue smoke spewing from the exhaust .
4410	The only effective remedy is to install hardened valve seats or a replacement cylinder head , both expensive options .
4411	Less costly , but not entirely satisfactory , is the practice of making every fourth tankful leaded petrol , which protects the valve seats but rather defeats the object .
4412	Alternatively there are several chemical additives on the market which aim to provide a substitute for lead , although the case for these products has yet to be proved .
4413	However , many cars built within the last few years have hardened valve seats , or alloy cylinder heads that need little ( simply a retune ) or no modification to use unleaded petrol .
4414	Finding out which cars can and which can not is not difficult .
4415	Esso filling stations have a free booklet listing most models produced since 1980 , as does the charity Clear ( 01-387 4970 ) , with more detail available in the Unleaded Petrol Guide ( Autodale , £2.99 ) .
4416	Looking at those lists provides interesting reading and bears out the used-car trade 's view that having a lead-only car could prove to be a liability .
4417	It is not as if four-star leaded fuel is going to be phased out tomorrow , but more and more buyers are asking : ‘ Does it take unleaded ? ’
4418	What is certain is that the pre-1989 Austin/MG range , all Skodas , Yugos and quite a few Lancias do not , which does not help already depressed resale prices .
4419	A 1985 Lancia Y10 ( lead only ) sells for around £2,000 whereas the similar Fiat Uno 55 from the same year , converted to run on unleaded , is worth around £500 more .
4420	A lead-only second-hand car is now worth about 10 per cent less than an unleaded equivalent .
4421	In years to come the percentage difference is likely to be much larger .
4422	Even so , exotica such as lead-only Porsche 911s and Ferraris are unlikely to be part of this trend , so no bargains there I 'm afraid .
4423	More impressive are the Japanese manufacturers whose cars dating from the early Eighties can run on unleaded without adjustment .
4424	Find a 1980 Toyota Corolla or 1982 Nissan Sunny that has not succumbed to rust , and you can buy with confidence .
4425	On the home front , most Fords and Vauxhalls from at least the mid-Eighties can use unleaded .
4426	If the ‘ greenness ’ of going unleaded still seems a bit of a grey area , it is possible to switch to diesel without a shadow of environmental doubt .
4427	Diesel always has been lead-free and the only adjustments you need to make are mental ones , because diesel-powered cars are no longer slow , smelly or noisy .
4428	They also return more miles to the gallon than their petrol equivalents , although service intervals are shorter .
4429	But after the publicity on unleaded fuel there has been increased interest in used diesel power .
4430	But remember that these cars accrue , and can withstand , significantly higher mileages than petrol cars , 50-90,000 being the norm .
4431	The tradition for diesel cars is far better established on the Continent and that is where the best buys come from .
4432	Perhaps the most successful maker is Peugeot , with a complete range of cars from the small 205 — around £3,000 for a 90,000-mile 1985 car — to the legendary 504 estate , about £2,000 for a 1982 example .
4433	The Germans are also fairly accomplished manufacturers , although a five-door 1980 Golf with a six-figure mileage will still cost £1,500 .
4434	Prestige comes in the shape of a Mercedes with the 240D or ‘ Stuttgart Taxi ’ , commanding £7,000 but returning unfailing reliability .
4435	Even if lead levels in the atmosphere do not bother you , I am sure you will find the fact that unleaded petrol is 15p cheaper , and that diesel fuel boosts mpg by at least a third , most interesting .
4436	Motoring : Miles of smiles as the diesel comes of age : Brett Fraser on the Citroen AX , which offers fuel economy without much sacrifice in performance to drivers willing to turn away from the petrol engine
4437	By BRETT FRASER
4438	BACK IN the bad old days , drivers of diesel cars were the social outcasts of the motoring world .
4439	At filling stations they were banished to the far-flung corners of the forecourt , away from the well-lit protection of covered petrol pumps , to battle 32-tonners for a turn at the diesel pump .
4440	That was not the end of their woe .
4441	Until recently , diesel cars were slow and very noisy , the theory being that this was the price you had to pay for economy .
4442	There was a social stigma attached to diesel car ownership , too .
4443	People thought perhaps you needed to save money — after all , that was the only reason for buying a diesel car , was n't it ?
4444	What few realised was that diesels were more costly than their petrol-engine counterparts , and that the break-even point ( when the fuel savings outweighed the price difference ) did n't occur until very large mileages had been covered .
4445	Those who sold their diesels after 50,000 miles or so might just as well have bought a petrol vehicle .
4446	At least that was the case in Britain , where the gap between petrol and diesel fuel prices has always been small .
4447	On the Continent , governments have actively encouraged the use of diesel-powered vehicles as a way of stretching resources .
4448	Not only is diesel much less expensive at the pumps , especially in France and Italy , but purchase tax on diesel-powered cars is reduced .
4449	Travel the roads of Italy , and petrol-engine cars appear to be in the minority .
4450	Even the Italians ' up-market makers , Alfa and Lancia , have diesel models .
4451	In Germany , diesel sales are in sharp decline after the Greens pointed an ill-informed finger at the visibly dirty exhausts of diesels and cried ‘ polluter ’ .
4452	In fact , diesels are cleaner in many ways than petrol engines in their emissions .
4453	German manufacturers such as Mercedes-Benz and Volkswagen are so convinced of the diesel engine 's future importance , they are developing ‘ clean-burn ’ units and fitting catalytic converters to the exhaust systems .
4454	Currently the French PSA Group , which comprises Citroen and Peugeot , produces the best diesel cars .
4455	‘ Best ’ means a combination of economy , speed , low noise , general refinement and pleasure to drive .
4456	Judged by these criteria , the little Citroen AX diesel is the best of a good bunch .
4457	The AX is the smallest of the Citroen range and is available in three-and five-door versions .
4458	Computers were used extensively during the car 's development , in a successful attempt to make the AX 220lb lighter than the class average .
4459	The significance is the boost it gives to the AX 's performance , particularly in the context of the diesel .
4460	Here is a diesel-engine car which will out-gun many of its petrol-engine rivals .
4461	It comes close to shaming some of its own stable-mates , too , and they are among the swiftest in their class .
4462	Top speed for this diesel is 96mph , and it spurts to 60mph in just 13.2 seconds .
4463	Most un-diesel-like .
4464	On the road , the biggest difference you notice with the diesel is the need to change up a gear slightly earlier than in a petrol car .
4465	This is not a hardship , as the AX is blessed with one of the lightest and quickest gear changes around .
4466	The diesel never feels slovenly and can be hurried along snaking back roads with the sort of haste which soon makes you forget that derv , not four-star ( or unleaded ) , goes into its fuel tank .
4467	Another way the AX deceives is by the noise it makes , or rather the lack of it .
4468	Once , all diesels sounded like taxis all the time .
4469	The baby Citroen tends to give the game away only when started from cold .
4470	At 70mph it is hard to tell what fuels the car , and only at idle , windows down , does the noise start to irritate .
4471	Even then , it is not so bad as to give you taxi syndrome .
4472	Other noises do infiltrate the cabin — the wind , the odd bump and thump from the suspension , and the constant rattle and clunk from the cabin fittings .
4473	Citroen makes some fine cars , but it tends not to make them very well .
4474	The plastic the French company uses for its interior trimmings is not of high quality and looks brittle and cheap , and in most places it sounds not to be screwed as tightly down as the designers originally intended .
4475	Look into a cavernous gap down the right side of the dashboard and there are wires on display — beyond them , daylight .
4476	For a light car , the AX rides surprisingly well , soaking up most road surface horrors with dignified composure .
4477	Rough roads , however , of the sort council repair crews seem so keen to create , ruffle it slightly and cause it to slap its tyres on the road in protest .
4478	Anyone who thinks owning a diesel spells the end of driving fun , should park their backside in the AX 's comfortable , supportive driver 's seat and go for a quick ride .
4479	It carries a bit more weight in its nose ( diesel engines are heavier than petrol ) but the derv-sipping AX is just as agile as its petroleum cousins .
4480	Light , accurate steering allows you to place the car precisely in a bend , and although there is a fair amount of body roll , once you 've chosen your cornering line not even bumps half-way through will deflect the faithful AX from its path .
4481	If you go into a corner too fast the tyres will lose their adhesion , but in the AX it is safe to take your foot off the throttle and let the car snap itself back into line .
4482	Try that on several cars in the Escort-class , and you will sometimes watch the back of the car overtake the front .
4483	The worst that happens when you overcook things in the AX is that the nose runs gently wide .
4484	And what is the fuel economy like ?
4485	Well , for a start , ignore the preposterous and irrelevant figures achieved on the recent RAC-supervised ‘ economy run ’ .
4486	Unless you drive everywhere at less than 40mph and never sit in traffic jams , the record-breaking 112mpg is as achievable as drying flowers underwater .
4487	Nevertheless , watching the AX 's fuel gauge fall to empty is a long and tedious vigil .
4488	In ordinary conditions — a mix of blatting down the motorway , pootling down country roads , and getting stuck in London 's slow-motion hours ( when the rest of the country apparently rushes ) , fuel consumption in the mid-sixties is almost guaranteed .
4489	With care , and clear roads , that figure should greatly improve .
4490	Even when driven with the utmost contempt for economy , it is difficult to drop below 50mpg .
4491	What is nice about the AX diesel is that you can smile smugly about the miles you are effortlessly squeezing from every gallon , in the knowledge you have sacrificed little along the way .
4492	No longer does the diesel driver need to feel disadvantaged .
4493	Second to the sporting GT model , the diesel , in either of its two trim levels , is the most desirable of the AX range .
4494	For that to be true , the diesel must have come of age .
4495	Motoring : The soaring triumph of the exotic Stag : Blow all your savings on a rare classic convertible which has just started to show a major rise in value , says Roger Bell
4496	By ROGER BELL
4497	PSST !
4498	Shares a bit shaky ?
4499	Bored by your savings passbook ?
4500	Then now is the time to invest in a Triumph Stag — but keep it to yourself .
4501	There are not that many good ones about .
4502	Convertible prices always tend to dip in the autumn , particularly after a balmy summer , but the advice to buy has little to do with cyclic depression .
4503	Stags are appreciating .
4504	In the crazy world of classic cars , where old Ferraris and Aston Martins fetch silly money , and Jaguar E-types have gone through the roof , the rise and rise of these exotics over the past two or three years has lifted values down the line .
4505	If Austin Rover 's Leyland forebears had made a better job of the Stag in the first place , values would probably have risen before .
4506	As it is , the car 's great attraction as a luxury convertible has always been overshadowed by its reputation for poor reliability .
4507	Not for nothing was it dubbed the ‘ Triumph Snag ’ .
4508	Today 's Stagisti , guided by the mechanical tragedies that befell their hapless predecessors , know that preventive maintenance is the key to dependability .
4509	Achieve that — and it is achievable , though my own car , currently without an engine , is not yet there — and the Stag 's attractions are nothing short of seductive .
4510	Much was expected of this Anglo-Italian four-place convertible , high on creature comforts as well as style , when it was introduced almost 20 years ago .
4511	Triumph aimed to build 12,000 Stags a year .
4512	In the event , it produced fewer than 26,000 in its seven years of manufacturing life , between 1970 and 1977 .
4513	Depressed production , costly for Leyland at the time , is good news for investors now because it has endowed the Stag with scarcity appeal .
4514	It goes without saying that rare cars are more coveted than common ones — and rare convertibles are of blue-chip status .
4515	Scarcity value apart , the Stag is made of the right stuff by classic yardsticks .
4516	It has style ( Michelotti 's ) , a luxurious , timber-encrusted cabin ( with hard and soft headgear ) , six speeds to play with ( four , plus two overdrive on the manual , though many Stags had three-speed automatic transmission ) and a burbling V8 engine that can be found in no other car .
4517	In its day , fully independent suspension ( like that of the Triumph 2000 saloon ) and lavish equipment that included power-assisted steering were also assets .
4518	Ironically , the Stag 's reputation as an expensive liability is rooted in the three-litre , 145-horsepower engine — effectively two four-cylinder Dolomite/Saab 99 units siamesed to a common crankshaft — that is germane to the car 's appeal .
4519	Overheating and loose valvegear chains , both of which can abruptly extinguish all mechanical life , are its ( avoidable ) weaknesses .
4520	With the wisdom of hindsight , it is easy to see now that the Stag 's troublesome V8 , designed and inadequately developed in-house by Triumph before it merged with Leyland , should have been ditched and replaced by Rover 's proven ex-Buick 3.5-litre V8 ( still used by Land-Rover , Morgan , TVR and others ) that was already on the shelf .
4521	In the interests of dependability , many Stags have subsequently been converted to Rover V8 power , gaining in reliability ( and quite possibly in performance ) what they lose in originality and nose heaviness .
4522	A Rover-engine Stag may well be a better car than one with Triumph power , but as a hybrid it will never be so valuable .
4523	Ford V6 conversions are intrinsically even less desirable — though worth considering as a cheap and reliable engine .
4524	Many Stags have undergone reversion transplants in the quest for originality .
4525	To buy a Stag just for its investment potential is to deny yourself the sort of al fresco luxury that most people can only dream about in a new car .
4526	Jaguar 's classy convertibles start at £41,200 , albeit with V12 power .
4527	What is more , the current XJS ragtop is structurally inferior to the cabriolet ( with Stag-like superstructure ) that preceded it .
4528	Other classy convertibles come from Mercedes-Benz , Porsche and Aston Martin , whose Volante , listed at £120,000 , is said to be changing hands at over £200,000 .
4529	Even the best Stags — and the best are very good indeed - are cheap by comparison .
4530	Here is stylish , tousled-hair motoring without the discomfort .
4531	Here is a car to be savoured at your leisure , on high days and holidays , but above all on sunny days .
4532	I enjoy my Stag most when it is loafing along in overdrive ( the DIY box has longer legs than the automatic ) , exhaust burbling as only a twin-pipe V8 can burble .
4533	When there is nothing above your head but the bracing T-bar — fitted as much to provide body rigidity as to anticipate US safety regulations that did not materialise — so much the better .
4534	From February 1973 , all Stags were sold with both hood ( which stows neatly in a lidded well behind the back seats ) and hardtop ( which required two pairs of strong arms to manipulate ) .
4535	So heavy and cumbersome is the hardtop , which fails to turn the Stag into a refined fixed-head coupe because of atrocious wind whoosh , that many have succumbed to rust while lying neglected in the garden , incubating snails .
4536	The Stag is not a sports car , nor is it especially fast : any modern GTi hatchback will comfortably outpace it in a sprint from rest to 60mph .
4537	What the Stag has which most modern cars do not is the endearing ability to amble quickly , to lope effortlessly , reeling in the miles without really trying .
4538	That , to me , is its strongest suit .
4539	Despite the intoxicating exhaust noise , the Stag is not dynamically exciting .
4540	Far from it .
4541	The engine 's lovely , lugging delivery ( it is not all bad , you see ) serves as an antidote to frenetic driving .
4542	Whereas most modern performance cars encourage aggression through their virulence , the Stag suppresses it while getting there just as quickly .
4543	Anyone who is not relaxed and glowing with a sense of well-being at the wheel of a good Stag should keep their money in the building society .
4544	Age and mileage have little to do with values any more .
4545	Condition is what counts .
4546	A concours Mk 1 will fetch much more than a ropy Mk 2 , perhaps six years ( and maybe 100,000 miles ) its junior .
4547	Triumph did develop the Stag a little , but not enough to make the last of the series significantly better than the first .
4548	Most of the changes were cosmetic , anyway .
4549	Prices today range from under £1,000 ( bangers for breaking or total restoration ) to over £15,000 .
4550	Unblemished freaks , still in showroom condition ( or else expensively restored to it ) have been known to sell for even more .
4551	Expect to pay £4,000 for a serviceable car , £6,000 for one of quality ( rust-free body , sound engine ) , £10,000 or more for outstanding examples .
4552	Spares , by the way , are plentiful and relatively cheap ( Rimmers and SOC Ltd are major suppliers ) and membership of the active Stag Owner 's Club is strongly recommended .
4553	Auctions : Dazzling riches of the Orient
4554	By ROGER BELL
4555	IT IS Asian Week at Sotheby 's and Christie 's .
4556	They are mixing Islamic art from the Middle East with Indian and South-East Asian .
4557	The sales combine items of charm at fairly accessible prices with some rare treasures aimed at big-time collectors .
4558	Homely Persian pottery of the twelfth to thirteenth century combines animal and bird images with sinuous plant motifs and marks the beginning of lustre wares ; they are mostly priced in the £500 to £1,000 range and rate high on charm .
4559	The Iznik pottery from Turkey dating from the fifteenth and sixteenth century explodes with colour on more sophisticated white grounds ; Iznik is now highly sought after by Turkish yuppies and prices run from £2,000 or so to £15,000 .
4560	Both houses combine elegant early metalwares ( twelfth/thirteenth century ) , bronze vessels with silver inlay — which are expensive — with nineteenth-century imitations , more flashy but in the mid-hundreds .
4561	There are plenty of Indian miniatures , colourful and charming evocations of princely courts , priced in hundreds or low thousands .
4562	Stone figures chipped off the war-torn temples of Cambodia are more expensive ; a striking Khmer figure will cost £20,000 or more .
4563	There are also outstanding bits of Indian stone monuments , with gods and goddesses sensuously entwined in spiritual embrace ; they start with the Gandhara grey schist carvings of the third/fourth century .
4564	Glasgow : Clocks and scientific instruments , Wednesday 11am .
4565	Market Harborough : Ceramics , glass , toys , silver , musical instruments and artworks , Tuesday 10am .
4566	Prints , watercolours , oil paintings , furniture and architectural effects , Tuesday 1.30pm .
4567	Gildings , Roman Way ( 0858 410414 ) .
4568	Finds : Old firm friends : John Windsor on a fight to save corporate archives from the bin
4569	By JOHN WINDSOR
4570	COMPANY records — boring-sounding but the ultimate in historical memorabilia -have slipped through the fingers of British private collectors by the skipload .
4571	Only a sophisticated handful of collectors seek company minute books , ledgers and subject files to add historical depth to displayable hardware such as insurance firemarks or automobilia .
4572	It has fallen to salaried professionals in universities , public record offices , the Business Archives Council , corporate bodies themselves — and the ‘ vanity press ’ — to salvage and conserve the tons of old papers explaining the historical context of what tumbled off the production line .
4573	As the heritage boom gathers pace , made-to-measure company and family biographies have become big business .
4574	For $27,000 ( £16,800 ) , the San Francisco vanity publisher The Sharper Image offers 225-page hardbound corporate histories in limited editions of 100 , for use ‘ as a public relations tool ’ .
4575	The London publisher Henry Melland offers corporate biographies for £5,000-£50,000 , and lists among past and present clients BP and British Steel .
4576	A new British company , Living Memories , will produce an illustrated album of company or family biography for a typical price of £500 for a family , £2,000 for a company .
4577	Most sophisticated of all , Terry Gourvish , director of the London School of Economics ' business history unit , charges up to £150,000 for a three to four-year company history project employing two full-time researchers .
4578	No vanity here : the result is a warts-and-all publication intended as salutary reading during management training .
4579	Rowntree and Glaxo are at present under his scrutiny .
4580	Such in-depth research is what Sunday-morning collecting should evolve into but seldom does .
4581	One of the few collectors dedicated enough to go for the company context is Peter Card , whose collection of 400 old bicycle lamps is without equal .
4582	As honorary archivist for Lucas , the motor components group , he begged the company to let him be custodian of the earliest archives - including Lucas family albums — when , during company restructuring two years ago , the entire archive went to the British Motor Industry Heritage Trust .
4583	Company archives are not that difficult to find .
4584	They tend to be the first victims of clean-sweep company shake-ups and takeovers .
4585	Expanding City firms hire skips to empty old papers out of basements and attics .
4586	I paid a Hackney second-hand dealer £100 a few years ago for seven black plastic bags of documents dating back to the seventeenth century — the contents of tin trunks removed from the basement of a firm of solicitors .
4587	They include the entire records , with a letters file , charting the heat-and- history of the London-based Egyptian Dredging Company , 1885-1938 .
4588	There is also a complete and intimate record of the acrimonious relationship which developed between the Norwich Union Insurance Company and the founding manager of its London office in Edwardian times .
4589	Besides an at times emotional correspondence , the manager 's bills for dinners , cigars and ladies ' hats , and a vellum wallet full of used cheques are all intact , providing a documentary cameo of the life and times of an Edwardian financial rake .
4590	The thought of such treasures disappearing into private collections brings a sigh to Serena Kelly , secretary-general of the Business Archives Council .
4591	She has never had to compete with private collectors for company archives and hopes she never has to .
4592	As the Council 's only full-time worker , she runs a one-woman intelligence operation , making friends with company archivists and hob-nobbing with big liquidators such as the London accountants Cork , Gully and Grant , Thornton , who allow her access to their warehouses of seized goods .
4593	She relies heavily on tip-offs , in turn alerting county and metropolitan records offices about historic company records due for release by liquidators .
4594	Two years ago , she and John Orbell , archivist of Baring Brothers and chairman of the Council 's Liquidations and Rescue Support Group , were tipped off by a friendly Extel employee about the news agency 's imminent takeover by United Newspapers .
4595	The voluminous Extel archives , giving a unique insight into Victorian journalists ' news-gathering methods ( and expenses claims ) are now in London 's Guildhall Library awaiting a researcher .
4596	We accompanied Pamela Scott-Wexo , a director of Living Memories , on a visit to one of her clients , the Royal Star and Garter Home for disabled servicemen at Richmond , Surrey , to see what her research would turn up .
4597	One resident , Jim Goodson , aged 105 , who enlisted in the Army in 1902 at the age of 17 , remembered being one of the first to be issued with a khaki uniform , an improvement on the red tunics which the Boers picked off so easily .
4598	She will include such memories in the home 's 75th anniversary volume .
4599	Collecting : You 're never alone with a print : Edward Lucie-Smith reports on why the modern multiple image is making a big impact in the blue-chip art market
4600	By EDWARD LUCIE-SMITH
4601	Many column inches have recently been devoted to the boom in classic modern and contemporary painting .
4602	Very little has been said about the boom in modern prints .
4603	In some ways this boom is even more extraordinary , because it represents not only a new taste but a subtly different attitude towards works of art .
4604	Peter Osborne of the Berkeley Square Gallery in London , which specialises in material of this kind , explained some of the rules of the print market .
4605	‘ A print of the right kind is not simply something that is worth money .
4606	It is more like actual currency .
4607	The reason is that while it may be in limited supply , it is n't unique .
4608	When other , identical examples exist , it is easy to establish what the value should be .
4609	It is also much easier to create a market situation which will see to it that the value goes up . ’
4610	Not every print , or every print-maker , is suitable for the purpose , however .
4611	The blue-chip market is confined to a very limited number of names .
4612	There are certain artists of the old Ecole de Paris : Matisse , Picasso , Miro , Chagall , Rouault .
4613	There are certain contemporary American artists : Jasper Johns , Frank Stella , Jim Dine , Sam Francis .
4614	There are also two British artists : Henry Moore and David Hockney .
4615	What are the rules of admission to the pantheon ?
4616	First , the artist has to be a ‘ major name ’ .
4617	Second , he has to be a prolific print-maker , and the prints themselves , though perhaps individually rare , must collectively be in reasonably good supply .
4618	Third , the prints must form an integral part of the artist 's career — that is , our appreciation of his achievement as a whole would be incomplete without some knowledge of his activity in this field .
4619	All of these are fairly obvious .
4620	But there are two other , less obvious laws as well .
4621	Prints , to be valuable , must be good impressions on good quality paper .
4622	Edvard Munch , whom many art historians would describe as one of the greatest print-makers of the century , fails to qualify as ‘ blue-chip ’ , despite occasional high prices at auction , because he often used poor quality paper and the impressions are not always of the best quality .
4623	The final qualification is that a print-maker , to reach the very top of the tree , must be known and appreciated by the Japanese .
4624	The Berkeley Square Gallery , for example , maintains a second outlet in Tokyo , as a vital part of its operations .
4625	Japanese collectors find it easy to appreciate prints , because works on paper are very much part of their own cultural heritage .
4626	They do not make the distinction between an image on canvas or panel and one on paper which seems so obvious — indeed axiomatic — to Europeans .
4627	They are aware of the fact that some of the greatest of their own artists — Hokusai , for instance , and Hiroshige — made print-making a primary creating medium .
4628	Japanese collectors also value the psychological security offered by the multiple image — to like exactly what other collectors like seems to them a good and reassuring thing .
4629	The way the market in prints moves is very much governed by developments in Japanese taste .
4630	‘ The first generation of collectors was very conservative , ’ said Mr Osborne .
4631	‘ They tended to like what was soft-edged and pretty . ’
4632	As a result of this , certain big Renoir prints are expensive — over £20,000 for the kind of lithograph which looks like a chalk drawing .
4633	This makes a striking contrast with Manet , whose prints , though rare , are modest in scale and not found in signed , numbered editions .
4634	The Berkeley Square Gallery has an example of his Infanta Margarita ( After Velazquez ) for only £1,250 .
4635	But now a new generation of Japanese collectors is coming into the market and their taste is for much stronger , more colourful things , such as prints by Miro .
4636	Something they have not developed a liking for yet is prints by the German Expressionists and their successors , the artists of the Neue Sachlichkeit such as Beckmann and Grosz .
4637	Occasionally , they take a liking to a European or American artist who is not really an absolutely major name internationally .
4638	An example is the American Carol Summers , who makes superb , coloured woodcuts .
4639	What they appreciate here is the closeness to their own tradition — Hokusai 's prints are coloured woodcuts , too — and superb quality .
4640	How much do real blue-chip prints tend to cost ?
4641	This is fairly easy to answer , but only with the proviso that a given conjunction of circumstances will set prices spiralling upward again .
4642	A recent major commercial show of Miro 's work , for example , took all his prices to a new high .
4643	A big coloured image , such as the aptly named Le Samourai , will now cost £25,000 .
4644	Spectacular coloured Chagalls bring even more — up to £45,000 .
4645	So do major prints by Sam Francis ( who lived and worked for a while in Japan ) .
4646	The benchmark here is over £50,000 .
4647	Matisse and Picasso , who form the backbone of the market in ‘ classic modern ’ prints , bring sums which depend both on the actual rarity of the image and its attractiveness .
4648	A beautiful odalisque by Matisse , such as Torso with a Jug , typical of the work he did in the 1920s and 1930s , will bring £35,000 or more .
4649	Images from Picasso 's eternally popular Vollard Suite , which dates from the early 1930s , bring between £8,000 and £12,000 plus — but these , though easy to like because of their smooth neo-classical style , are not coloured and were published in a fairly big edition .
4650	The established artist who is currently rising most rapidly in price is Hockney .
4651	Images from the mid-1970s — large prints of swimming pools , vases of flowers and interiors ( all nice , neutral subjects ) were till recently anchored at around £15,000 .
4652	In recent months they have begun to tear loose from this platform .
4653	Today , £20,000 might be a good guess for an especially attractive image and Mr Osborne predicts that the price will soon be nearer to £30,000 .
4654	Obviously a good choice for collectors who like their blue-chips gilded .
4655	But what about the long-term future ?
4656	One problem is that there do not seem to be many potentially blue-chip names in the pipeline , ready to join what is now a severely restricted group .
4657	The Neo-Expressionists mostly seem too dour to qualify — and most do not make prints on a sufficiently regular basis .
4658	One answer seems to be that the market will take another look at Impressionist prints , and those by the Nabis , both of which are beginning to seem undervalued , in comparison with what was produced by their successors .
4659	You can get a fine Bonnard print for £2,500 ; a Pissarro for less than £7,000 .
4660	Signac , who continued his activity as a print-maker into the period after the First World War , uses the graphic medium superbly .
4661	A tip-top specimen costs £10,000 .
4662	Even Cezanne 's rare prints are starting to look a bit undervalued , in terms of the way in which the market as a whole is performing .
4663	Move over Hockney , Uncle Paul is behind you .
4664	If this is the way things go , there would be a certain art-historical justice in it .
4665	Food : The test of a true boar : British gourmets could soon go the whole hog , writes Henrietta Green
4666	By HENRIETTA GREEN
4667	WILD BOAR once roamed the fields and forests of Britain .
4668	They were the sport of rich noblemen who hunted and ate them with terrific enthusiasm — until there were none .
4669	Now there are plans afoot to reintroduce them to Britain on a grand scale for the ‘ gourmet ’ market .
4670	Not as wild boar running free and doing untold damage to the countryside , as in Italy , France and Germany ; but as farmed wild boar which should ease your mind , even if it causes the farmers untold headaches .
4671	Thus it was , last Friday , that the inaugural meeting of the British Wild Boar Association took place .
4672	It was held , appropriately , on the first day of Michaelmas when , in medieval times , pigs were traditionally turned out into the woods to fatten up on acorns .
4673	It got off to a hairy start with several heated discussions about what a wild boar is .
4674	Does ‘ wild ’ mean how it is kept ?
4675	Can it be farmed intensively or should it only be reared extensively ?
4676	Does the name cover only pure-bred wild boars or can it include a cross , bred with a domestic pig ?
4677	If crosses are to be allowed , what percentage of cross is acceptable ?
4678	And just because it looks like a wild boar with the striped marking or ‘ agouti ’ ( long snout , straight tail and small pointy ears ) , can it be accepted as such without a genetic test ?
4679	Pretty technical stuff this , with enough contentious issues to make every boar farmer 's hair curl .
4680	As Robert Spencer Bernard , barrister and part-time farmer of wild boar for several years on his Buckinghamshire estate , said : ‘ A tiger is a tiger whether you see it in the London Zoo or in the Indian forests , but with a wild boar the argument is n't so simple . ’
4681	We had been herded together to discuss this and other issues by Dr Derek Booth , animal geneticist and scientist .
4682	Easily recognised by his boar 's head tie , his enthusiasm and appetite was first whetted when he met the ‘ iron-age ’ pig several years ago .
4683	A cross between a wild boar and Tamworth pig , it was bred for a BBC TV series in an attempt to recreate animals from that era .
4684	Dr Booth was admittedly ‘ horrified by the amount of fat it carried ’ and it was not until he saw wild boar in a wild life park in France that he realised the opportunities .
4685	Clearly Sam Weller had also seen the light .
4686	A self-proclaimed poineer and the ‘ first man to go the whole hog ’ with his business , the Wild Boar Company , he was all for setting the strictest standards of breeds , offering a product aimed at the ‘ luxury end ’ of the market .
4687	‘ Cross breeds do produce some excellent pork , but it 's not wild boar and it should n't be sold as such . ’
4688	He believes that even when farmed , wild boar must be genetically pure and reared in conditions which approximate the wild as closely as possible .
4689	An animal 's environment , the food it eats , the rigours of its existence and its genetic make-up may all affect the taste and texture of its flesh .
4690	‘ But what we do n't know , ’ Sam Weller told me , ‘ is the relevant importance of those factors ’ .
4691	Research was then produced by Jeff Woods from the Institute of Food Research which backed up part of Sam Weller 's argument .
4692	A cross-bred boar was reared and fed indoors in a pen , under identical conditions to a domestic pig , and the meats from the two carcasses tasted exactly the same .
4693	Clearly environment and diet do determine the taste .
4694	When kept outside and left to roam , eating a varied diet and developing plenty of muscle , boars will taste different from the domestic pig .
4695	But what no one seemed prepared or able to tell was to what extent the purity of breed influences the taste of boar .
4696	As one cynical farmer whispered knowingly , ‘ If they 're not careful , they 'll price themselves right out of the market with their boring pure-bred boars .
4697	That 'll leave it wide open for the supermarket boys to market a ‘ free-range acorn-fed pork ’ — an intensively bred pig , fattened up in woods in half the time and costing well under an eighth of the price . ’
4698	Not a bad idea , but if the British Wild Boar Association , already bristling with problems , is to combat that threat it must sort out its standards .
4699	If you do manage to buy wild boar , I suggest you try making hamburgers .
4700	This recipe is adapted from Patricia Lousada 's satisfying Game Cookery ( John Murray , £15.95 ) .
4701	It reminds me of eating wild boar in Tuscany where fennel seed is traditionally added to give an edge to the flavour .
4702	Wild Boar Hamburgers Ingredients : 450g ( 1lb ) lean boar meat from shoulder or loin 50g ( 2oz ) fresh boar or pork back fat 3tbs breadcrumbs 2tbs fresh cream 2tbs fennel seed 1 ½ tsp fine sea salt Freshly ground black pepper Small pinch ground cloves and nutmeg Preparation : Mince the meat and fat and mix in the remaining ingredients , or mix all the ingredients together in a food processor .
4703	Shape the mixture into smallish hamburgers in the palm of your hands and , turning them once , grill them for about 5-7 minutes depending on how rare you like the meat .
4704	Recipe : Filling formulas for filo
4705	By LINDA SUE PARK
4706	READER submissions for filo pastry recipes were a trickle rather than a torrent .
4707	Postmarks were for the most part no further north than the Midlands .
4708	But filo pastry is available in the North , because this week 's winning recipe comes from Newcastle upon Tyne .
4709	The quality of the recipes was such that it was difficult to choose which to publish .
4710	Several readers like the combination of filo and fish or seafood — prawns , salmon , trout .
4711	P Taylor from Chester recommends a filling of courgettes and pine nuts from the excellent Greens Cook Book ( Bantam , £12.95 ) .
4712	Frances Craig from Middlesex sends a formula for a classic apple strudel , learnt when she was a washer-up in a German Gasthof .
4713	But the winning recipe is for the filo fruit baskets , below , sent in by Margaret Crisell from Newcastle which wins her a bottle of 1987 Torres Milmanda wine from Pendes , Spain .
4714	Savoury filo recipes next week ; then we want the best recipe for game-bird stuffings .
4715	Breadcrumb recipes are welcome but why not stretch to bulgur , rice , millet ?
4716	The prize is a bottle of Matusalem Oloroso sherry .
4717	Send your suggestions , with source if not original , to Recipe/Weekend Section , The Independent , 40 City Road , London EC1Y 2DB .
4718	Filo Fruit Baskets serves 4 Ingredients : filo pastry , cut into 5in squares 2oz butter , melted ¼ pint double cream , whipped 2tbs Greek yoghurt ¼ tsp ground ginger 2-4 pieces crystallised ginger , finely chopped 1tbs soft brown sugar Seasonal fruits , cut into small dice Preparation : Butter the outsides of four upturned ramekins .
4719	Drape four or five squares of filo , each in a slightly different position , over each ramekin , brushing layers with melted butter .
4720	Bake at 180C/ 350F/gas 4 for 20 minutes , until crisp and golden .
4721	Cool , remove pastry and turn right side up .
4722	Immediately before serving , fill with fruit and top with cream mixed with yoghurt and the gingers .
4723	Food : Ping , unload , zap and refuel
4724	By KEITH BOTSFORD
4725	SOME 18 months ago I wrote about my own incompetence with and dislike for the microwave oven .
4726	Now I have found out why .
4727	My ideas about food are definitely passe .
4728	A recent survey in the Wall Street Journal , America 's only readable paper , has shown that the microwave is the nation 's favourite household appliance , second only to the smoke alarm in terms of its importance to the American lifestyle .
4729	The microwave , says the Journal , is ‘ the embodiment of Eighties-style individualism , turning each family member into a chef .
4730	Gone is the sanctity of the family meal .
4731	Irretrievably altered is the role of Mom , the nurturer ’ .
4732	The present pattern is an ultra-sound bite , one for each member of the family , or a six-pack for guests if such people still exist .
4733	Kids in shorts can stick My Own Meal , Kids Kitchen and Kid Cuisine ( all from Campbells ) in the little box , turn the knob , wait briefly , unload , zap down their food and get back to the major business of life , the latest video .
4734	The loveliest remarks on this phenomenon come from the corporate convenience food conveyancers .
4735	Consider Joel Weiner , a senior vice-president in the Kraft division ( you know it , it makes the world 's worst cheese ) of Philip Morris .
4736	Weiner says that in the Eighties we 've gone past the ‘ grazing ’ stage , in which we picked at this and that all day long , to ‘ refuelling ’ : the pit-stop in which we shovel food in our mouths as fast as we can .
4737	If speed is of the essence — and all marketing surveys say it is — then the microwave is the manufacturers ' version of the licence to print money .
4738	Time is money and , after money , time is what the masses crave most .
4739	Ergo , the manufacturers no longer dare market food that takes more than 10 minutes to prepare .
4740	In my own lifetime , the changes have accelerated .
4741	I grew up in a house where the smells of preparation and cooking began , below stairs , not long after I rose .
4742	In my youth the time required to prepare a meal , even a simple one , was usually two hours .
4743	By the Seventies this had been cut down , thanks to the pressure cooker , hotter ovens and the first electric gadgets , to an hour .
4744	Ten years ago , surveys showed people were willing to put in a half-hour in the kitchen .
4745	It 's 10 minutes today : less than a cat puts in on a bird .
4746	Nor is it just time that is in question .
4747	Convenience means just that .
4748	Many people today are too lazy even to open a tin .
4749	Tomorrow 's meal , like an astronaut 's dinner , comes in a plastic bag .
4750	But that is not all .
4751	Mona Doyle , president of Consumer Network Inc in Philadelphia which studies our food habits , has a philosophical point of some interest .
4752	She thinks the microwave ‘ has changed our perceptions of time , much as telephones changed them at the turn of the century ’ .
4753	Her proof is in the restaurant trade : ‘ Even fast food restaurants ( do ) not seem fast , because at home you do n't have to wait in line . ’
4754	You know how it is with these developments .
4755	We get genetically ( and culinarily ) imprinted with them .
4756	You used to walk to the store ; now you ride .
4757	You used to shop daily , now it 's weekly .
4758	Fresh has become frozen .
4759	Kitchen travail was for reward ; now you get gratification without labour .
4760	Roles were defined : mother in the kitchen , father owlishly awaiting his dinner , kids scrubbing their hands .
4761	Now there is to be the universal democracy of the microwave .
4762	Father wants tandoori duck , mother something green , the kids go for nachos except for studious Cecil , who wants Raymond Blanc in a package .
4763	The schedule advances only on when the microwave is free .
4764	Conversation at table is as superfluous as a sermon in church ; all is still but for the ping of the latest microwave masterpiece .
4765	Campbells ' Richard Nelson has it right .
4766	Today 's kids ‘ are being imprinted with the microwave , not the stove ’ .
4767	The hearth as metaphor is dead .
4768	But the Journal also comes up with some curious contradictions : 36 per cent blame the microwave for poorer flavour , 20 per cent think it makes food soggy .
4769	The Journal 's final lament is to the grilled cheese sandwich or the croque monsieur .
4770	Once a golden brown staple , crisp on the outside and creamy within , it has gone the way of all flesh .
4771	But in this rather frightening vision of the present and future , so have all the things I learnt to care about in eating : flavour , texture , invention , subtlety , companionship — and leisure , which marks the end of the working day and the use of time , not its gobbling .
4772	Food : Sad decline of a fishy business : Customers are deserting Billingsgate market to buy direct from the ports , says Deirdre McQuillan
4773	By DEIRDRE MCQUILLAN
4774	I do like to be able to pick a fish up by its head , ’ William Black said , waving a sea bass in rigor mortis at me , before going on to inspect its gills .
4775	He makes a bleary-eyed and disorientating living between Rungis , the wholesale fish market on the south side of Paris , and London , where he supplies fish to restaurants such as Tante Claire , Alistair Little and Suntory .
4776	His is just one example of the new enterprises supplying fish to shops or restaurants that cut out Billingsgate market ; for they also cut out the 25 per cent or so that trading through the market adds to the cost of fish .
4777	Independent fishmongers often buy directly from the ports using Billingsgate , the central wholesale market for shops and restaurants across the whole of southern England , as a back-up .
4778	‘ If they do n't get their finger out , they will lose almost all their business to the direct trade , ’ is Jim Moran 's succinct analysis of the market 's future .
4779	From a family of fish merchants , he has served on Billingsgate committees and all but despairs of ‘ them ever getting on with the real business of selling fish ’ .
4780	He estimates that the market handles only 50 per cent of the trade in fresh fish in southern England .
4781	Mr Moran added to that decline when his Billingsgate-based merchant business , R W Larkin , opened a swanky new fishmonger in London 's King 's Road to which fish is delivered from port agents around Britain , and also from Boulogne .
4782	‘ As wholesalers we felt that Billingsgate was not offering us the facilities we needed , ’ he explains .
4783	‘ We still trade from there , but in order to thrive we have had to look at better ways of selling . ’
4784	The shop has two aims .
4785	One is to see if adventurous buying , lavish displays and good service ( which includes opening until 7pm and for a half-day on Sunday ) will galvanise the public .
4786	The other is to provide a more convenient location for restaurant customers .
4787	‘ Chefs do n't want to get up at six in the morning to go to Docklands , ’ Mr Moran says .
4788	Although it seems that the South is recovering its appetite for fresh fish , with restaurants buying about 30 per cent of the fish sold in the area , there is no doubt that there has been a positive nosedive in the demand for fresh fish in Britain as whole .
4789	Sales have fallen by as much as 60 per cent in the last 40 years .
4790	As a result , fishmongers have disappeared : their numbers dropped from 9,000 in 1971 to 3,000 in 1981 .
4791	A recent report on fish retailing , compiled by the market research company Keynote , records the number of wet fish shops in the south of England having declined by 60 per cent in 27 years .
4792	Since the days when oysters were as everyday a dish as hamburgers are now , we have reached a point where each person eats only an average of 1.2oz of fresh fish a week .
4793	Billingsgate has presided over this decline with all the grace of an oligarchy that sees its power declining .
4794	It has stuck to an antiquated way of operating that harks back to the days of guild power , and has refused to countenance criticism .
4795	Transport arrangements within the market are strictly regulated .
4796	Porters must be hired to move any amount of fish , however small , and minders paid to look after customers ' trucks .
4797	No prices are written down and there is no competitive bidding .
4798	All a buyer gets to see are the sample boxes opened on the trading floor , on the strength of which he negotiates with the merchant .
4799	This is how markets operate the world over , but distrust of Billingsgate 's dealing seems to be a problem .
4800	Nicholas Roe , a writer who used to be a fishmonger , says : ‘ I seemed to spend more time sending fish back than selling it .
4801	I had to move further and further back down the line to the boats . ’
4802	Horror stories abound : of the rogue 's law that prevented any port agent who sold directly to fishmongers from ever trading with a Billingsgate merchant again ; of the nepotism that determined who could have a stand in the market ; and of prices that varied according to who you were and whether you had a good introduction .
4803	These stories are commonplace , although those involved are wary of going on record .
4804	On trips organised for food writers , public perfidy is a popular lament .
4805	The shopper , so the refrain goes , does n't know how to cook fresh fish , ca n't cope with bones , wo n't pay a fair price and will only be persuaded to buy the traditional species .
4806	The traditional fishmonger was n't up to much either , apparently , selling the same varieties of fish to the same ageing customers .
4807	Now it is the turn of Billingsgate to feel anxious , although according to Lou Hart , chairman of the London Fish Merchants ' Association , Billingsgate has nothing to fear : ‘ We offer an unrivalled service .
4808	No one else has the range of fish .
4809	‘ The porterage system is antiquated but it works efficiently .
4810	If we could think of a better system we would introduce it .
4811	‘ Customers are coming back to Billingsgate because they know what they are getting .
4812	Problems with short weights are being tackled and if fish has been on the market overnight , the person buying it is aware .
4813	‘ Contrary to what people think , we are well prepared for 1992 .
4814	We are going to be ahead of any market in Europe . ’
4815	Traipsing around after William Black through the cold , wet trading floors of Rungis , however , it was immediately apparent that the size of the Paris operation and the variety of fish dwarfed London .
4816	Refrigerated juggernauts from all over Europe wait outside the doors .
4817	He explained that on the Continent it is taken for granted that fish caught on a line by small boats should command a premium for the careful handling that preserves both flavour and texture .
4818	‘ British fishermen are beginning to use lines rather than nets , but they are selling to the Continent because they 'd be daft not to .
4819	‘ It must sometimes be the case that I bring British fish back to London , but it will probably be in better condition than if it had been bought there as foreign agents insist on good transport and packing . ’
4820	We stopped at one of his regular suppliers and cadged a few sea urchins , then the knife to eat them with .
4821	‘ Fish is such wonderful stuff , so perishable and so delicate , ’ enthuses Mr Black , waving at the glorious display of shellfish all around us .
4822	‘ It is not treated by the trade in Britain with anything like the respect it is given in France .
4823	‘ In the fish business , 1992 has already arrived .
4824	There is one market across Europe and the prices the Germans and Italians will pay are even surprising the French .
4825	They will pay whatever it takes to get Scots crayfish and Dublin Bay prawns into the shops and restaurants in beautiful condition , when no one back home can be bothered .
4826	That is why I prefer to work from here . ’
4827	As an example , he opened a case of red mullet — the fashionable restaurant fish of the moment — which he had just bought .
4828	‘ Now this is packed in three-kilo boxes , filled properly with ice of just the right size .
4829	Large lumps bruise the skin .
4830	The mullet have been carefully interleaved in the box , rather than shoved in .
4831	‘ If I bought red mullet in England , I would probably get a two-stone cardboard box .
4832	Two stone is really too large to handle carefully and as for cardboard and ice — well , you can imagine .
4833	The quality of the ice and the arrangement of the fish would be far more haphazard and so , by the time the fish are delivered , their stomachs will have split . ’
4834	Alex Griffiths , Marks &amp; Spencer 's fish executive , was surprised at the idea that the company might have even contemplated using Billingsgate when it began selling fresh fish nationally four years ago .
4835	‘ I go to the market regularly to see what is happening , ’ he says , ‘ but our entire trading policy is based on building relations with suppliers .
4836	Our suppliers buy direct from the ports , prepare and pack the fish for us and then we have it on the shelves within 24 hours .
4837	We stipulate temperature and handling at every stage .
4838	Going though another stage would mean a loss of control . ’
4839	With restaurants , supermarkets , wholesalers , single fishmongers and foreign buyers all scrabbling for the best fish , the implications for Billingsgate are clear .
4840	In the opinion of Tim Lucas , a director of the wholesale company Simson : ‘ Billingsgate is , shall we say , a little tired .
4841	There has been such a growth in direct dealing that fish is only getting sent to Billingsgate when no one else wants it . ’
4842	But Jim Moran believes Billingsgate has already found its niche .
4843	‘ Billingsgate is a good place for cheap fish , ’ he says .
4844	‘ There is a need for fish that has been on the market a couple of days .
4845	It is not the image which people like you want to know about , but it is true .
4846	The British like cheap food . ’
4847	Nicholas Roe concluded our conversation rather surprisingly by saying : ‘ Billingsgate is a really tough environment , you work long hours and grow old quickly .
4848	You should n't be too hard on it . ’
4849	It seems all the more of a waste if those long , cold hours only result in stale fish .
4850	Drink : Desire in search of a name : Do the French have the ‘ mot juste ’ to describe the desire for a reviving drink ?
4851	In the first of a monthly series , Michael Jackson hunts in vain
4852	By MICHAEL JACKSON
4853	THANK God it 's Saturday .
4854	I know that today is Saturday because already I am thirsty for a dry , hoppy pint of bitter at the end of the afternoon : an aperitif to sharpen my appetite for this evening 's Indian meal .
4855	How did you feel as you came to the end of your working week yesterday afternoon ?
4856	Boy , I had a thirst .
4857	We say we are thirsty when we mean that we fancy a glass of wine , a pint of beer , a gin and tonic or a shot of whisky — the pleasure of naming our poison — at the end of a busy day or tiresome week .
4858	That is not thirst .
4859	To enjoy it , we do not need to be dry : just in need of a restorative or relaxant , or maybe a focus for a social moment or brief encounter .
4860	We call it ‘ thirst ’ in lieu of a more accurate description .
4861	No , not more accurate : ‘ thirst ’ is not accurate at all as a description for this apparently indescribable condition .
4862	It is a desire millions of us know and share , yet for which we have no name .
4863	This desire that can not find its name ( though it would dare speak it , if it could ) is pleasurable .
4864	It is as enjoyable as feeling gently hungry or amorous .
4865	No , not amorous : randy — we have a word for that .
4866	Any of these conditions is pleasurable so long as there is a good likelihood of satisfaction in reasonably short order .
4867	Let puritans and pessimists damn , disapprove or dismiss these appetites ; that is their loss .
4868	Those of us who enjoy them need only a name for each condition , so that we may discuss them in expectation and in recollection .
4869	Come to think of it , neither hunger nor randiness hits quite the spot .
4870	Peckishness and lust , perhaps ?
4871	Or does that sound like a firm of country solicitors ?
4872	This is to digress .
4873	What of this thirst that can be satisfied by an unquenching drink ?
4874	Wine is not quenching , but no less in demand for that .
4875	Try to quench your thirst with a light , fresh white and you will drink enough to put you on your back .
4876	Beer is , quite rightly , Britain 's favourite Friday night drink .
4877	It can momentarily blunt a thirst , but not altogether cut it .
4878	The nearest to being quenching is the ‘ white ’ beer of Berlin .
4879	Anything with even a modest smack of hops dries the palate ready for the next one .
4880	So , of course , does alcohol itself .
4881	It may for a moment seem to quench but it dehydrates , as purportedly healthy abstainers are forever telling me .
4882	To quench is more than to refresh although our lying , lascivious eyes tell us the two are the same .
4883	Does any drink look more quenching than one of those Italian or French patent aperitifs , swirling in a refractive pink or russet oiliness , clothing the melting ice : a Campari , Dubonnet , Lillet or ( too rare in this country ) a Picon ?
4884	Are they quenching ?
4885	No , refreshing .
4886	In Strasburg , they have been known to lace beer with Picon , thereby ruining both drinks ( as Queen Victoria reputedly did with claret and malt whisky ) , but still the result is not especially quenching .
4887	Perhaps a shimmering dry Martini cocktail ( minimum dilution , stirred , not shaken ; and served straight up ) looks even more refreshing , though its effect is that of a silver mallet .
4888	In the right place ( possibly New York , but San Francisco is better ) , the Martini is the ultimate ‘ Thank God it 's Friday ’ drink .
4889	The requirement for such pleasures is a matter of time and place , and it does not have to be Friday , Berlin or Strasburg , New York or San Francisco .
4890	Not feeling thirsty , but fancying a drink , has a world of moments .
4891	Some Frenchmen start the day with a coffee and calvados .
4892	The people of Munich call their version of Weissbier ‘ breakfast beer ’ and have it with a pair of coddled veal sausages .
4893	New Orleans favours a mid-morning milk punch , or its own variation on the gin fizz .
4894	If the moment is before a lunch on the plane , it really ought to be a Bloody Mary .
4895	If it is at an elegant dinner table , there is a choice between a fino sherry ( or a manzanilla ) or champagne .
4896	None of these requires anything even approaching a thirst .
4897	Do we really ‘ wash down ’ a good meal with claret ?
4898	Port is immediately suggested by Stilton ; cognac by coffee .
4899	I do not fully appreciate the experience of an American late-night movie without a bourbon , or a book at bedtime without a single malt .
4900	These are not moments of thirst … but nor are they causes of drunkenness ( unless one tries to pack all such experiences into one day ) .
4901	We do not drink because we are thirsty .
4902	Nor , if we are in civilised cast of mind , because we wish to become drunk .
4903	A friend of mine says that her body tells her , without being asked , the season of the year .
4904	At the end of summer , her body stops wanting gin and tonics and suddenly desires whisky .
4905	If it were only a matter of alcohol , would a body care ?
4906	People will nevertheless say that the desire is for nothing more than alcohol .
4907	So why not a pill or an injection ?
4908	Because there would be no colour , no ritual , no time and place , no glorious variety .
4909	Worst of all , there would be no aroma , taste , texture or finish .
4910	These are sensuous pleasures at their most enjoyable when we ritualise them , but how do we feel when we desire them ?
4911	We , who have so many words in our language , have none for this .
4912	But then , do the French , Spanish or Italians have a word for it ?
4913	Perhaps they do ; maybe I have not being paying attention ; too busy with the eau-de-vie , anis or grappa .
4914	Do the Greeks have a word for it ?
4915	Could we borrow , beg or invent one ?
4916	Answers in a bottle , please .
4917	If you are feeling — for lack of a better word -thirsty , let's meet again next month .
4918	Same time , same place ?
4919	It will be my turn to get them in , I think .
4920	Food and Drink Update : Menu for number 10
4921	By MICHAEL JACKSON
4922	THE silly question is an essential ingredient to most competitions .
4923	In the case of the last round of the Young Cook of Britain competition , to be judged on 17 October , regional finalists were asked which famous person they would like to cook for .
4924	Julia Noon , aged 12 , of St Anne 's on Sea , Lancashire , took the politic and patriotic route and wrote to 10 Downing Street to find out the Prime Minister 's favourite foods .
4925	She received a reply within four days .
4926	Food and Drink Update : Seriously Spanish
4927	By MICHAEL JACKSON
4928	AS CHEAP and ersatz tapas bars continue to pop up on London street corners , it is easy to overlook serious Spanish food .
4929	Benat Arroyabe , a young chef from San Sebastian , proved a notable exception during the last year by producing food of great elegance and flavour ( witness capiscums filled with fresh cod and parsley sauce ) in the Basque-oriented Guernica restaurant at 21a Foley Street , London W1 ( 01-580 0623 ) .
4930	Jose Ramon , a new chef who arrived at the Guernica two months ago , will hopefully maintain these high standards .
4931	Another breeze from the Basque country , this one long-awaited , will be felt in the cookery world from 12 October with the publication of Maria Jose Sevilla 's Life and Food in the Basque Country ( Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson , £12.95 ) .
4932	The author , a co-founder of the information department promoting Spanish food in Britain , has refrained from the greasy chorizo and rough rioja marketing rush .
4933	Instead , she has spent the last two years working on a book chronicling Basque life through its kitchens and markets .
4934	Food and Drink Update : Small beginnings
4935	By MICHAEL JACKSON
4936	THE restaurant industry has two things in common with the film industry : the high failure rate among its small businesses and the abundance of ‘ how to ’ wisdom .
4937	The message behind ‘ How to open and operate a small restaurant ’ — a series of six lectures in Chester organised by Leith 's School of Food and Wine — may well be chapter and verse on ‘ how not to ’ .
4938	The lecturer , Martin Wood , counts equally successful those students of the courses he has given since 1984 , at Leith 's School of Food and Wine in London , who subsequently decided not to open restaurants .
4939	Mr Wood 's own experience in the restaurant business spans 20 years .
4940	Numbering among those of his students who have opened restaurants is Sian Sutherland-Dodd , whose London restaurant , Sutherlands , was named 1989 Soho Newcomer of the Year by The Good Food Guide .
4941	‘ The course is good because it makes you think about things like how to lay out a kitchen , ’ Ms Sutherland-Dodd says .
4942	She recommends as essential , however , working in someone else 's restaurant first , as she did in Nick Lander 's L'Escargot .
4943	Martin Wood 's course begins on 1 November , running six consecutive Wednesdays at the Greenbank Centre , Eaton Road , Chester , Cheshire , from 6.30pm .
4944	Fee £175 .
4945	Drink : October wine rack
4946	By ANTHONY ROSE
4947	AS WE reported at the beginning of September , an increase in the fixed price agreed each year between Champagne 's growers and merchants seemed inevitable , putting further pressure on prices that are already affected by rising demand .
4948	Sure enough , due to prospects this year of a vintage declaration and an estimated shortfall of supply over demand ( although the latest estimated harvest figure has gone up from 250 to 274 million bottles ) , the price per kilo of grapes was fixed at 26.77 French francs , a 13.78 per cent increase over last year .
4949	Among the champagne houses that have already increased their prices to the wine trade are Moet et Chandon ( 9.6 per cent ) , Laurent Perrier ( 4.9 per cent ) , Bollinger ( about 3 per cent ) and Lanson ( about 4 per cent ) .
4950	The following companies are planning further increases in the new year as well : Mumm ( about 4 per cent ) and Heidsieck Monopole ( about 4 per cent ) .
4951	Those holding their prices , at least until the new year , include Veuve Clicquot and Perrier-Jouet .
4952	Even where price increases have taken place , retailers with good stocks may be able to cushion the blow for a while .
4953	But with Christmas not that far off , some forward champagne planning is definitely in order .
4954	An impressive new range comes from Thresher 's five new Wine Rack stores ( four in London , one in Gerrards Cross ) which , with a 12.5 per cent case discount , aim to offer the cheapest champagne prices in the high street .
4955	Two of the best-value offers in the Wine Rack are the attractive Bricourt Carte Noire ( £9.99 bottle/ £8.74 case bottle ) and Charles Heidsieck 1982 , a classy , golden vintage champagne ( £12.99 bottle/ £11.37 case bottle ) .
4956	Also worth seeking out is Victoria Wine 's new 1983 vintage champagne with its classic ‘ biscuity ’ character ( £11.99 ) as is Waitrose 's rich , winy 1983 Extra Dry vintage fizz ( £10.50 ) .
4957	And now for something completely different : cheap and cheerful claret .
4958	Two good examples from Victoria Wine are its house claret , juicy and a touch almondy , a good buy at £2.89 ; and Baron Rocheau 1988 , £2.49 , which is soft , a touch green and stalky , but still good value .
4959	Also from selected Victoria Wine stores is a sauternes in half-bottles with all the creamy , nutty complexity you might expect from a more elevated chateau , a snip at £2.99 .
4960	Going Out to Eat and Drink : Days of pie and mash : Susan Ellicott tucks into plates of British tradition
4961	By SUSAN ELLICOTT
4962	ONE PIE , one mash .
4963	One pie , two mash .
4964	Two pie , one mash .
4965	Two pie , two mash .
4966	The menu at Manze 's , in London 's Tower Bridge Road , by Bermondsey Antiques Market , may not be extensive but at £1.20 for one pie , one mash - sloshed with parsley sauce — there is little reason for customers to argue .
4967	‘ Well , there is a choice , ’ says Graham Poole , whose grandfather started the shop in 1895 .
4968	‘ They can take it or leave it . ’
4969	This is a no-nonsense restaurant full of regulars : a child on Dad 's shoulders ; teenagers in Day-Glo shorts who skateboard away afterwards ; workmen in overalls ; weary shoppers with bulky carrier bags stopping off before getting the bus home .
4970	The lunch hour is like a time warp — give or take a few price increases .
4971	The walls are covered with original cream and emerald tiles .
4972	Without the restaurant 's 10 grey and white marble tables , wooden pew-like seats and two whirring overhead fans , the interior would have the atmosphere of a beautiful — and meticulously clean — Victorian public convenience .
4973	‘ The hardest thing is keeping it looking the same , ’ says Mr Poole , ‘ mainly because of modern health and safety regulations . ’
4974	He winces as he recounts how builders recently suggested he replace the ‘ M. Manze ’ above the door — in gold-leaf on glass — with a plastic sign .
4975	Someone else quoted him £30 to replace a broken fan .
4976	Imagining his grandfather turning in his grave at the very thought , he paid £120 to repair the old one .
4977	Generations of customers will thank him .
4978	Many remember eating jellied eels — still on the menu , along with eels and mash — with their parents .
4979	And the restaurant is often crowded with aficionados getting their fix of nostalgia .
4980	A novice struggling through one of Manze 's pies — crisp golden pastry on top and soggy pastry below — is quickly spotted and given a cursory instruction in the art of pie-eating by a Bermondsey-born professional .
4981	‘ You do n't look like you 're enjoying that .
4982	That 's because you did n't put vinegar on it .
4983	You sprinkle it on and then cut the pie into pieces . ’
4984	But why the soft pastry ?
4985	‘ Why do Beefeaters wear those silly hats and hang around the Tower of London ?
4986	It 's tradition , is n't it ? ’ says Dennis Thompson , an ambulance driver who eats at Manze 's at least three times a week .
4987	He mops his brow as he demolishes a double helping of pie , salty mash and pale green gravy .
4988	‘ At home you can never get the gravy like they do here , ’ confides one elderly woman .
4989	‘ They use the water from the jellied eels . ’
4990	Mr Poole , however , is not giving away any secrets .
4991	He is none too pleased that one of the waitresses has let on that the pies are made with two different pastries .
4992	Outsiders are not invited into the basement kitchen .
4993	‘ We 've always used the same recipe , ’ he says .
4994	Scotch beef comes from Smithfield Market , fresh each day , boned and minced .
4995	The vinegar — one plain and one with chilli — comes in whisky bottles .
4996	Two gallons are used daily .
4997	Salt and pepper sit on the tables in old jam-jars : ‘ The biggest containers possible and they still get nicked , ’ says Mr Poole .
4998	On Saturdays , hungry customers queue along the pavement beneath Manze 's green awning that is sandwiched between a dry-cleaner 's and a men 's clothing store .
4999	The smell of stewed eels streams from a steaming vat into the busy street .
5000	Even the late Roy Orbison has eaten pie and mash here .
